 become of us. i don’t know what in the world is to become of us.”
 a shade of uneasiness came into hawkins’s face. he said:
 “why, nancy, you—you can’t believe what you are saying.”
 “believe it, indeed? i know it, si. and i know that we haven’t a cent in
 the world, and we’ve sent ten thousand dollars a-begging.”
 “nancy, you frighten me. now could that man—is it possible that i—hanged
 if i don’t believe i have missed a chance! don’t grieve, nancy, don’t
 grieve. i’ll go right after him. i’ll take—i’ll take—what a
 fool i am!—i’ll take anything he’ll give!”
 the next instant he left the house on a run. but the man was no longer in
 the town. nobody knew where he belonged or whither he had gone. hawkins
 came slowly back, watching wistfully but hopelessly for the stranger, and
 lowering his price steadily with his sinking heart. and when his foot
 finally pressed his own threshold, the value he held the entire tennessee
 property at was five hundred dollars—two hundred down and the rest
 in three equal annual payments, without interest.
 there was a sad gathering at the hawkins fireside the next night. all the
 children were present but clay. mr. hawkins said:
 “washington, we seem to be hopelessly fallen, hopelessly involved. i am
 ready to give up. i do not know where to turn—i never have been down
 so low before, i never have seen things so dismal. there are many mouths
 to feed; clay is at work; we must lose you, also, for a little while, my
 boy. but it will not be long—the tennessee land——”
 he stopped, and was conscious of a blush. there was silence for a moment,
 and then washington—now a lank, dreamy-eyed stripling between
 twenty-two and twenty-three years of age—said:
 “if col. sellers would come for me, i would go and stay with him a while,
 till the tennessee land is sold. he has often wanted me to come, ever
 since he moved to hawkeye.”
 “i’m afraid he can’t well come for you, washington. from what i can hear—not
 from him of course, but from others—he is not far from as bad off as
 we are—and his family is as large, too. he might find something for
 you to do, maybe, but you’d better try to get to him yourself, washington—it’s
 only thirty miles.”
 “but how can i, father? there’s no stage or anything.”
 “and if there were, stages require money. a stage goes from swansea, five
 miles from here. but it would be cheaper to walk.”
 “father, they must know you there, and no doubt they would credit you in a
 moment, for a little stage ride like that. couldn’t you write and ask
 them?”
 “couldn’t you, washington—seeing it’s you that wants the ride? and
 what do you think you’ll do, washington, when you get to hawkeye? finish
 your invention for making window-glass opaque?”
 “no, sir, i have given that up. i almost knew i could do it, but it was so
 tedious and troublesome i quit it.”
 “i was afraid of it, my boy. then i suppose you’ll finish your plan of
 coloring hen’s eggs by feeding a peculiar diet to the hen?”
 “no, sir. i believe i have found out the stuff that will do it, but it
 kills the hen; so i have dropped that for the present, though i can take
 it up again some day when i learn how to manage the mixture better.”
 “well, what have you got on hand—anything?”
 “yes, sir, three or four things. i think they are all good and can all be
 done, but they are tiresome, and besides they require money. but as soon
 as the land is sold——”
 “emily, were you about to say something?” said hawkins.
 “yes, sir. if you are willing, i will go to st. louis. that will make
 another mouth less to feed. mrs. buckner has always wanted me to come.”
 “but the money, child?”
 “why i think she would send it, if you would write her—and i know
 she would wait for her pay till——”
 “come, laura, let’s hear from you, my girl.”
 emily and laura were about the same age—between seventeen and
 eighteen. emily was fair and pretty, girlish and diffident—blue eyes
 and light hair. laura had a proud bearing, and a somewhat mature look; she
 had fine, clean-cut features, her complexion was pure white and contrasted
 vividly with her black hair and eyes; she was not what one calls pretty—she
 was beautiful. she said:
 “i will go to st. louis, too, sir. i will find a way to get there. i will
 make a way. and i will find a way to help myself along, and do what i can
 to help the rest, too.”
 she spoke it like a princess. mrs. hawkins smiled proudly and kissed her,
 saying in a tone of fond reproof:
 “so one of my girls is going to turn out and work for her living! it’s
 like your pluck and spirit, child, but we will hope that we haven’t got
 quite down to that, yet.”
 the girl’s eyes beamed affection under her mother’s caress. then she
 straightened up, folded her white hands in her lap and became a splendid
 ice-berg. clay’s dog put up his brown nose for a little attention, and got
 it. he retired under the table with an apologetic yelp, which did not
 affect the iceberg.
 judge hawkins had written and asked clay to return home and consult with
 him upon family affairs. he arrived the evening after this conversation,
 and the whole household gave him a rapturous welcome. he brought sadly
 needed help with him, consisting of the savings of a year and a half of
 work—nearly two hundred dollars in money.
 it was a ray of sunshine which (to this easy household) was the earnest of
 a clearing sky.
 bright and early in the morning the family were astir, and all were busy
 preparing washington for his journey—at least all but washington
 himself, who sat apart, steeped in a reverie. when the time for his
 departure came, it was easy to see how fondly all loved him and how hard
 it was to let him go, notwithstanding they had often seen him go before,
 in his st. louis schooling days. in the most matter-of-course way they had
 borne the burden of getting him ready for his trip, never seeming to think
 of his helping in the matter; in the same matter-of-course way clay had
 hired a horse and cart; and now that the good-byes were ended he bundled
 washington’s baggage in and drove away with the exile.
 at swansea clay paid his stage fare, stowed him away in the vehicle, and
 saw him off. then he returned home and reported progress, like a committee
 of the whole.
 clay remained at home several days. he held many consultations with his
 mother upon the financial condition of the family, and talked once with
 his father upon the same subject, but only once. he found a change in that
 quarter which was distressing; years of fluctuating fortune had done their
 work; each reverse had weakened the father’s spirit and impaired his
 energies; his last misfortune seemed to have left hope and ambition dead
 within him; he had no projects, formed no plans—evidently he was a
 vanquished man. he looked worn and tired. he inquired into clay’s affairs
 and prospects, and when he found that clay was doing pretty well and was
 likely to do still better, it was plain that he resigned himself with easy
 facility to look to the son for a support; and he said, “keep yourself
 informed of poor washington’s condition and movements, and help him along
 all you can, clay.”
 the younger children, also, seemed relieved of all fears and distresses,
 and very ready and willing to look to clay for a livelihood. within three
 days a general tranquility and satisfaction reigned in the household.
 clay’s hundred and eighty or ninety, dollars had worked a wonder. the
 family were as contented, now, and as free from care as they could have
 been with a fortune. it was well that mrs. hawkins held the purse
 otherwise the treasure would have lasted but a very little while.
 it took but a trifle to pay hawkins’s outstanding obligations, for he had
 always had a horror of debt.
 when clay bade his home good-bye and set out to return to the field of his
 labors, he was conscious that henceforth he was to have his father’s
 family on his hands as pensioners; but he did not allow himself to chafe
 at the thought, for he reasoned that his father had dealt by him with a
 free hand and a loving one all his life, and now that hard fortune had
 broken his spirit it ought to be a pleasure, not a pain, to work for him.
 the younger children were born and educated dependents. they had never
 been taught to do anything for themselves, and it did not seem to occur to
 them to make an attempt now.
 the girls would not have been permitted to work for a living under any
 circumstances whatever. it was a southern family, and of good blood; and
 for any person except laura, either within or without the household to
 have suggested such an idea would have brought upon the suggester the
 suspicion of being a lunatic.
 via, pecunia! when she’s run and gone and fled, and dead,
 then will i fetch her again with aqua vita, out of an old hogshead!
 while there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer, i’ll never want
 her! coin her out of cobwebs, dust, but i’ll have her! raise wool
 upon egg-shells, sir, and make grass grow out of marrow-bones,
 to make her come! b. jonson.
 bearing washington hawkins and his fortunes, the stage-coach tore out of
 swansea at a fearful gait, with horn tooting gaily and half the town
 admiring from doors and windows. but it did not tear any more after it got
 to the outskirts; it dragged along stupidly enough, then—till it
 came in sight of the next hamlet; and then the bugle tooted gaily again
 and again the vehicle went tearing by the horses. this sort of conduct
 marked every entry to a station and every exit from it; and so in those
 days children grew up with the idea that stage-coaches always tore and
 always tooted; but they also grew up with the idea that pirates went into
 action in their sunday clothes, carrying the black flag in one hand and
 pistolling people with the other, merely because they were so represented
 in the pictures—but these illusions vanished when later years
 brought their disenchanting wisdom. they learned then that the stagecoach
 is but a poor, plodding, vulgar thing in the solitudes of the highway; and
 that the pirate is only a seedy, unfantastic “rough,” when he is out of
 the pictures.
 toward evening, the stage-coach came thundering into hawkeye with a
 perfectly triumphant ostentation—which was natural and proper, for
 hawkey a was a pretty large town for interior missouri. washington, very
 stiff and tired and hungry, climbed out, and wondered how he was to
 proceed now. but his difficulty was quickly solved. col. sellers came down
 the street on a run and arrived panting for breath. he said:
 “lord bless you—i’m glad to see you, washington—perfectly
 delighted to see you, my boy! i got your message. been on the look-out for
 you. heard the stage horn, but had a party i couldn’t shake off—man
 that’s got an enormous thing on hand—wants me to put some capital
 into it—and i tell you, my boy, i could do worse, i could do a deal
 worse. no, now, let that luggage alone; i’ll fix that. here, jerry, got
 anything to do? all right-shoulder this plunder and follow me. come along,
 washington. lord i’m glad to see you! wife and the children are just
 perishing to look at you. bless you, they won’t know you, you’ve grown so.
 folks all well, i suppose? that’s good—glad to hear that. we’re
 always going to run down and see them, but i’m into so many operations,
 and they’re not things a man feels like trusting to other people, and so
 somehow we keep putting it off. fortunes in them! good gracious, it’s the
 country to pile up wealth in! here we are—here’s where the sellers
 dynasty hangs out. hump it on the door-step, jerry—the blackest
 niggro in the state, washington, but got a good heart—mighty likely
 boy, is jerry. and now i suppose you’ve got to have ten cents, jerry.
 that’s all right—when a man works for me—when a man—in
 the other pocket, i reckon—when a man—why, where the mischief
 as that portmonnaie!—when a—well now that’s odd—oh, now
 i remember, must have left it at the bank; and b’george i’ve left my
 check-book, too—polly says i ought to have a nurse—well, no
 matter. let me have a dime, washington, if you’ve got—ah, thanks.
 now clear out, jerry, your complexion has brought on the twilight half an
 hour ahead of time. pretty fair joke—pretty fair. here he is, polly!
 washington’s come, children! come now, don’t eat him up—finish him
 in the house. welcome, my boy, to a mansion that is proud to shelter the
 son of the best man that walks on the ground. si hawkins has been a good
 friend to me, and i believe i can say that whenever i’ve had a chance to
 put him into a good thing i’ve done it, and done it pretty cheerfully,
 too. i put him into that sugar speculation—what a grand thing that
 was, if we hadn’t held on too long!”
 true enough; but holding on too long had utterly ruined both of them; and
 the saddest part of it was, that they never had had so much money to lose
 before, for sellers’s sale of their mule crop that year in new orleans had
 been a great financial success. if he had kept out of sugar and gone back
 home content to stick to mules it would have been a happy wisdom. as it
 was, he managed to kill two birds with one stone—that is to say, he
 killed the sugar speculation by holding for high rates till he had to sell
 at the bottom figure, and that calamity killed the mule that laid the
 golden egg—which is but a figurative expression and will be so
 understood. sellers had returned home cheerful but empty-handed, and the
 mule business lapsed into other hands. the sale of the hawkins property by
 the sheriff had followed, and the hawkins hearts been torn to see uncle
 dan’l and his wife pass from the auction-block into the hands of a negro
 trader and depart for the remote south to be seen no more by the family.
 it had seemed like seeing their own flesh and blood sold into banishment.
 washington was greatly pleased with the sellers mansion. it was a
 two-story-and-a-half brick, and much more stylish than any of its
 neighbors. he was borne to the family sitting room in triumph by the swarm
 of little sellerses, the parents following with their arms about each
 other’s waists.
 the whole family were poorly and cheaply dressed; and the clothing,
 although neat and clean, showed many evidences of having seen long
 service. the colonel’s “stovepipe” hat was napless and shiny with much
 polishing, but nevertheless it had an almost convincing expression about
 it of having been just purchased new. the rest of his clothing was napless
 and shiny, too, but it had the air of being entirely satisfied with itself
 and blandly sorry for other people’s clothes. it was growing rather dark
 in the house, and the evening air was chilly, too. sellers said:
 “lay off your overcoat, washington, and draw up to the stove and make
 yourself at home—just consider yourself under your own shingles my
 boy—i’ll have a fire going, in a jiffy. light the lamp, polly, dear,
 and let’s have things cheerful—just as glad to see you, washington,
 as if you’d been lost a century and we’d found you again!”
 by this time the colonel was conveying a lighted match into a poor little
 stove. then he propped the stove door to its place by leaning the poker
 against it, for the hinges had retired from business. this door framed a
 small square of isinglass, which now warmed up with a faint glow. mrs.
 sellers lit a cheap, showy lamp, which dissipated a good deal of the
 gloom, and then everybody gathered into the light and took the stove into
 close companionship.
 the children climbed all over sellers, fondled him, petted him, and were
 lavishly petted in return. out from this tugging, laughing, chattering
 disguise of legs and arms and little faces, the colonel’s voice worked its
 way and his tireless tongue ran blithely on without interruption; and the
 purring little wife, diligent with her knitting, sat near at hand and
 looked happy and proud and grateful; and she listened as one who listens
 to oracles and, gospels and whose grateful soul is being refreshed with
 the bread of life. bye and bye the children quieted down to listen;
 clustered about their father, and resting their elbows on his legs, they
 hung upon his words as if he were uttering the music of the spheres.
 a dreary old hair-cloth sofa against the wall; a few damaged chairs; the
 small table the lamp stood on; the crippled stove—these things
 constituted the furniture of the room. there was no carpet on the floor;
 on the wall were occasional square-shaped interruptions of the general
 tint of the plaster which betrayed that there used to be pictures in the
 house—but there were none now. there were no mantel ornaments,
 unless one might bring himself to regard as an ornament a clock which
 never came within fifteen strokes of striking the right time, and whose
 hands always hitched together at twenty-two minutes past anything and
 traveled in company the rest of the way home.
 “remarkable clock!” said sellers, and got up and wound it. “i’ve been
 offered—well, i wouldn’t expect you to believe what i’ve been
 offered for that clock. old gov. hager never sees me but he says, ‘come,
 now, colonel, name your price—i must have that clock!’ but my
 goodness i’d as soon think of selling my wife. as i was saying to—silence
 in the court, now, she’s begun to strike! you can’t talk against her—you
 have to just be patient and hold up till she’s said her say. ah well, as i
 was saying, when—she’s beginning again! nineteen, twenty,
 twenty-one, twenty-two, twen——ah, that’s all.—yes, as i
 was saying to old judge——go it, old girl, don’t mind me.—now
 how is that?——isn’t that a good, spirited tone? she can wake
 the dead! sleep? why you might as well try to sleep in a thunder-factory.
 now just listen at that. she’ll strike a hundred and fifty, now, without
 stopping,—you’ll see. there ain’t another clock like that in
 christendom.”
 washington hoped that this might be true, for the din was distracting—though
 the family, one and all, seemed filled with joy; and the more the clock
 “buckled down to her work” as the colonel expressed it, and the more
 insupportable the clatter became, the more enchanted they all appeared to
 be. when there was silence, mrs sellers lifted upon washington a face that
 beamed with a childlike pride, and said:
 “it belonged to his grandmother.”
 the look and the tone were a plain call for admiring surprise, and
 therefore washington said (it was the only thing that offered itself at
 the moment:)
 “indeed!”
 “yes, it did, didn’t it father!” exclaimed one of the twins. “she was my
 great-grandmother—and george’s too; wasn’t she, father! you never
 saw her, but sis has seen her, when sis was a baby-didn’t you, sis! sis
 has seen her most a hundred times. she was awful deef—she’s dead
 now. ain’t she, father!”
 all the children chimed in, now, with one general babel of information
 about deceased—nobody offering to read the riot act or seeming to
 discountenance the insurrection or disapprove of it in any way—but
 the head twin drowned all the turmoil and held his own against the field:
 “it’s our clock, now—and it’s got wheels inside of it, and a thing
 that flutters every time she strikes—don’t it, father!
 great-grandmother died before hardly any of us was born—she was an
 old-school baptist and had warts all over her—you ask father if she
 didn’t. she had an uncle once that was bald-headed and used to have fits;
 he wasn’t our uncle, i don’t know what he was to us—some kin or
 another i reckon—father’s seen him a thousand times—hain’t
 you, father! we used to have a calf that et apples and just chawed up
 dishrags like nothing, and if you stay here you’ll see lots of funerals—won’t
 he, sis! did you ever see a house afire? i have! once me and jim terry——”
 but sellers began to speak now, and the storm ceased. he began to tell
 about an enormous speculation he was thinking of embarking some capital in—a
 speculation which some london bankers had been over to consult with him
 about—and soon he was building glittering pyramids of coin, and
 washington was presently growing opulent under the magic of his eloquence.
 but at the same time washington was not able to ignore the cold entirely.
 he was nearly as close to the stove as he could get, and yet he could not
 persuade himself that he felt the slightest heat, notwithstanding the
 isinglass’ door was still gently and serenely glowing. he tried to get a
 trifle closer to the stove, and the consequence was, he tripped the
 supporting poker and the stove-door tumbled to the floor. and then there
 was a revelation—there was nothing in the stove but a lighted
 tallow-candle! the poor youth blushed and felt as if he must die with
 shame. but the colonel was only disconcerted for a moment—he
 straightway found his voice again:
 “a little idea of my own, washington—one of the greatest things in
 the world! you must write and tell your father about it—don’t forget
 that, now. i have been reading up some european scientific reports—friend
 of mine, count fugier, sent them to me—sends me all sorts of things
 from paris—he thinks the world of me, fugier does. well, i saw that
 the academy of france had been testing the properties of heat, and they
 came to the conclusion that it was a nonconductor or something like that,
 and of course its influence must necessarily be deadly in nervous
 organizations with excitable temperaments, especially where there is any
 tendency toward rheumatic affections. bless you i saw in a moment what was
 the matter with us, and says i, out goes your fires!—no more slow
 torture and certain death for me, sir. what you want is the appearance of
 heat, not the heat itself—that’s the idea. well how to do it was the
 next thing. i just put my head to work, pegged away a couple of days, and
 here you are! rheumatism? why a man can’t any more start a case of
 rheumatism in this house than he can shake an opinion out of a mummy!
 stove with a candle in it and a transparent door—that’s it—it
 has been the salvation of this family. don’t you fail to write your father
 about it, washington. and tell him the idea is mine—i’m no more
 conceited than most people, i reckon, but you know it is human nature for
 a man to want credit for a thing like that.”
 washington said with his blue lips that he would, but he said in his
 secret heart that he would promote no such iniquity. he tried to believe
 in the healthfulness of the invention, and succeeded tolerably well; but
 after all he could not feel that good health in a frozen body was any real
 improvement on the rheumatism.
 —whan pe horde is thynne, as of seruyse, nought
 replenesshed with grete diuersite of mete & drinke, good chere
 may then suffise with honest talkyng—— the book of
 curtesye. mammon. come on, sir. now, you set your foot on
 shore in novo orbe; here’s the rich peru: and there within,
 sir, are the golden mines, great solomon’s ophir!——
 b. jonson
 the supper at col. sellers’s was not sumptuous, in the beginning, but it
 improved on acquaintance. that is to say, that what washington regarded at
 first sight as mere lowly potatoes, presently became awe-inspiring
 agricultural productions that had been reared in some ducal garden beyond
 the sea, under the sacred eye of the duke himself, who had sent them to
 sellers; the bread was from corn which could be grown in only one favored
 locality in the earth and only a favored few could get it; the rio coffee,
 which at first seemed execrable to the taste, took to itself an improved
 flavor when washington was told to drink it slowly and not hurry what
 should be a lingering luxury in order to be fully appreciated—it was
 from the private stores of a brazilian nobleman with an unrememberable
 name. the colonel’s tongue was a magician’s wand that turned dried apples
 into figs and water into wine as easily as it could change a hovel into a
 palace and present poverty into imminent future riches.
 washington slept in a cold bed in a carpetless room and woke up in a
 palace in the morning; at least the palace lingered during the moment that
 he was rubbing his eyes and getting his bearings—and then it
 disappeared and he recognized that the colonel’s inspiring talk had been
 influencing his dreams. fatigue had made him sleep late; when he entered
 the sitting room he noticed that the old hair-cloth sofa was absent; when
 he sat down to breakfast the colonel tossed six or seven dollars in bills
 on the table, counted them over, said he was a little short and must call
 upon his banker; then returned the bills to his wallet with the
 indifferent air of a man who is used to money. the breakfast was not an
 improvement upon the supper, but the colonel talked it up and transformed
 it into an oriental feast. bye and bye, he said:
 “i intend to look out for you, washington, my boy. i hunted up a place for
 you yesterday, but i am not referring to that,—now—that is a
 mere livelihood—mere bread and butter; but when i say i mean to look
 out for you i mean something very different. i mean to put things in your
 way than will make a mere livelihood a trifling thing. i’ll put you in a
 way to make more money that you’ll ever know what to do with. you’ll be
 right here where i can put my hand on you when anything turns up. i’ve got
 some prodigious operations on foot; but i’m keeping quiet; mum’s the word;
 your old hand don’t go around pow-wowing and letting everybody see his
 k’yards and find out his little game. but all in good time, washington,
 all in good time. you’ll see. now there’s an operation in corn that looks
 well. some new york men are trying to get me to go into it—buy up
 all the growing crops and just boss the market when they mature—ah,
 i tell you it’s a great thing. and it only costs a trifle; two millions or
 two and a half will do it. i haven’t exactly promised yet—there’s no
 hurry—the more indifferent i seem, you know, the more anxious those
 fellows will get. and then there is the hog speculation—that’s
 bigger still. we’ve got quiet men at work,” [he was very impressive here,]
 “mousing around, to get propositions out of all the farmers in the whole
 west and northwest for the hog crop, and other agents quietly getting
 propositions and terms out of all the manufactories—and don’t you
 see, if we can get all the hogs and all the slaughter houses into our
 hands on the dead quiet—whew! it would take three ships to carry the
 money.—i’ve looked into the thing—calculated all the chances
 for and all the chances against, and though i shake my head and hesitate
 and keep on thinking, apparently, i’ve got my mind made up that if the
 thing can be done on a capital of six millions, that’s the horse to put up
 money on! why washington—but what’s the use of talking about it—any
 man can see that there’s whole atlantic oceans of cash in it, gulfs and
 bays thrown in. but there’s a bigger thing than that, yes bigger——”
 “why colonel, you can’t want anything bigger!” said washington, his eyes
 blazing. “oh, i wish i could go into either of those speculations—i
 only wish i had money—i wish i wasn’t cramped and kept down and
 fettered with poverty, and such prodigious chances lying right here in
 sight! oh, it is a fearful thing to be poor. but don’t throw away those
 things—they are so splendid and i can see how sure they are. don’t
 throw them away for something still better and maybe fail in it! i
 wouldn’t, colonel. i would stick to these. i wish father were here and
 were his old self again—oh, he never in his life had such chances as
 these are. colonel; you can’t improve on these—no man can improve on
 them!”
 a sweet, compassionate smile played about the colonel’s features, and he
 leaned over the table with the air of a man who is “going to show you” and
 do it without the least trouble:
 “why washington, my boy, these things are nothing. they look large of
 course—they look large to a novice, but to a man who has been all
 his life accustomed to large operations—shaw! they’re well enough to
 while away an idle hour with, or furnish a bit of employment that will
 give a trifle of idle capital a chance to earn its bread while it is
 waiting for something to do, but—now just listen a moment—just
 let me give you an idea of what we old veterans of commerce call
 ‘business.’ here’s the rothschild’s proposition—this is between you
 and me, you understand——”
 washington nodded three or four times impatiently, and his glowing eyes
 said, “yes, yes—hurry—i understand——”
 ——“for i wouldn’t have it get out for a fortune. they want me
 to go in with them on the sly—agent was here two weeks ago about it—go
 in on the sly” [voice down to an impressive whisper, now,] “and buy up a
 hundred and thirteen wild cat banks in ohio, indiana, kentucky, illinois
 and missouri—notes of these banks are at all sorts of discount now—average
 discount of the hundred and thirteen is forty-four per cent—buy them
 all up, you see, and then all of a sudden let the cat out of the bag!
 whiz! the stock of every one of those wildcats would spin up to a
 tremendous premium before you could turn a handspring—profit on the
 speculation not a dollar less than forty millions!” [an eloquent pause,
 while the marvelous vision settled into w.’s focus.] “where’s your hogs
 now? why my dear innocent boy, we would just sit down on the front
 door-steps and peddle banks like lucifer matches!”
 washington finally got his breath and said:
 “oh, it is perfectly wonderful! why couldn’t these things have happened in
 father’s day? and i—it’s of no use—they simply lie before my
 face and mock me. there is nothing for me but to stand helpless and see
 other people reap the astonishing harvest.”
 “never mind, washington, don’t you worry. i’ll fix you. there’s plenty of
 chances. how much money have you got?”
 in the presence of so many millions, washington could not keep from
 blushing when he had to confess that he had but eighteen dollars in the
 world.
 “well, all right—don’t despair. other people have been obliged to
 begin with less. i have a small idea that may develop into something for
 us both, all in good time. keep your money close and add to it. i’ll make
 it breed. i’ve been experimenting (to pass away the time), on a little
 preparation for curing sore eyes—a kind of decoction nine-tenths
 water and the other tenth drugs that don’t cost more than a dollar a
 barrel; i’m still experimenting; there’s one ingredient wanted yet to
 perfect the thing, and somehow i can’t just manage to hit upon the thing
 that’s necessary, and i don’t dare talk with a chemist, of course. but i’m
 progressing, and before many weeks i wager the country will ring with the
 fame of beriah sellers’ infallible imperial oriental optic liniment and
 salvation for sore eyes—the medical wonder of the age! small bottles
 fifty cents, large ones a dollar. average cost, five and seven cents for
 the two sizes.
 “the first year sell, say, ten thousand bottles in missouri, seven
 thousand in iowa, three thousand in arkansas, four thousand in kentucky,
 six thousand in illinois, and say twenty-five thousand in the rest of the
 country. total, fifty five thousand bottles; profit clear of all expenses,
 twenty thousand dollars at the very lowest calculation. all the capital
 needed is to manufacture the first two thousand bottles—say a
 hundred and fifty dollars—then the money would begin to flow in. the
 second year, sales would reach , bottles—clear profit, say,
 $,—and in the meantime the great factory would be building in
 st. louis, to cost, say, $,. the third year we could easily sell
 ,, bottles in the united states and——”
 “o, splendid!” said washington. “let’s commence right away—let’s——”
 “——,, bottles in the united states—profit at
 least $,—and then it would begin to be time to turn our
 attention toward the real idea of the business.”
 “the real idea of it! ain’t $, a year a pretty real——”
 “stuff! why what an infant you are, washington—what a guileless,
 short-sighted, easily-contented innocent you are, my poor little
 country-bred know-nothing! would i go to all that trouble and bother for
 the poor crumbs a body might pick up in this country? now do i look like a
 man who——does my history suggest that i am a man who deals in
 trifles, contents himself with the narrow horizon that hems in the common
 herd, sees no further than the end of his nose? now you know that that is
 not me—couldn’t be me. you ought to know that if i throw my time and
 abilities into a patent medicine, it’s a patent medicine whose field of
 operations is the solid earth! its clients the swarming nations that
 inhabit it! why what is the republic of america for an eye-water country?
 lord bless you, it is nothing but a barren highway that you’ve got to
 cross to get to the true eye-water market! why, washington, in the
 oriental countries people swarm like the sands of the desert; every square
 mile of ground upholds its thousands upon thousands of struggling human
 creatures—and every separate and individual devil of them’s got the
 ophthalmia! it’s as natural to them as noses are—and sin. it’s born
 with them, it stays with them, it’s all that some of them have left when
 they die. three years of introductory trade in the orient and what will be
 the result? why, our headquarters would be in constantinople and our
 hindquarters in further india! factories and warehouses in cairo, ispahan,
 bagdad, damascus, jerusalem, yedo, peking, bangkok, delhi, bombay—and
 calcutta! annual income—well, god only knows how many millions and
 millions apiece!”
 washington was so dazed, so bewildered—his heart and his eyes had
 wandered so far away among the strange lands beyond the seas, and such
 avalanches of coin and currency had fluttered and jingled confusedly down
 before him, that he was now as one who has been whirling round and round
 for a time, and, stopping all at once, finds his surroundings still
 whirling and all objects a dancing chaos. however, little by little the
 sellers family cooled down and crystalized into shape, and the poor room
 lost its glitter and resumed its poverty. then the youth found his voice
 and begged sellers to drop everything and hurry up the eye-water; and he
 got his eighteen dollars and tried to force it upon the colonel—pleaded
 with him to take it—implored him to do it. but the colonel would
 not; said he would not need the capital (in his native magnificent way he
 called that eighteen dollars capital) till the eye-water was an
 accomplished fact. he made washington easy in his mind, though, by
 promising that he would call for it just as soon as the invention was
 finished, and he added the glad tidings that nobody but just they two
 should be admitted to a share in the speculation.
 when washington left the breakfast table he could have worshiped that man.
 washington was one of that kind of people whose hopes are in the very
 clouds one day and in the gutter the next. he walked on air now. the
 colonel was ready to take him around and introduce him to the employment
 he had found for him, but washington begged for a few moments in which to
 write home; with his kind of people, to ride to-day’s new interest to
 death and put off yesterday’s till another time, is nature itself. he ran
 up stairs and wrote glowingly, enthusiastically, to his mother about the
 hogs and the corn, the banks and the eye-water—and added a few
 inconsequential millions to each project. and he said that people little
 dreamed what a man col. sellers was, and that the world would open its
 eyes when it found out. and he closed his letter thus:
 “so make yourself perfectly easy, mother-in a little while you shall have
 everything you want, and more. i am not likely to stint you in anything, i
 fancy. this money will not be for me, alone, but for all of us. i want all
 to share alike; and there is going to be far more for each than one person
 can spend. break it to father cautiously—you understand the need of
 that—break it to him cautiously, for he has had such cruel hard
 fortune, and is so stricken by it that great good news might prostrate him
 more surely than even bad, for he is used to the bad but is grown sadly
 unaccustomed to the other. tell laura—tell all the children. and
 write to clay about it if he is not with you yet. you may tell clay that
 whatever i get he can freely share in-freely. he knows that that is true—there
 will be no need that i should swear to that to make him believe it.
 good-bye—and mind what i say: rest perfectly easy, one and all of
 you, for our troubles are nearly at an end.”
 poor lad, he could not know that his mother would cry some loving,
 compassionate tears over his letter and put off the family with a synopsis
 of its contents which conveyed a deal of love to them but not much idea of
 his prospects or projects. and he never dreamed that such a joyful letter
 could sadden her and fill her night with sighs, and troubled thoughts, and
 bodings of the future, instead of filling it with peace and blessing it
 with restful sleep.
 when the letter was done, washington and the colonel sallied forth, and as
 they walked along washington learned what he was to be. he was to be a
 clerk in a real estate office. instantly the fickle youth’s dreams forsook
 the magic eye-water and flew back to the tennessee land. and the gorgeous
 possibilities of that great domain straightway began to occupy his
 imagination to such a degree that he could scarcely manage to keep even
 enough of his attention upon the colonel’s talk to retain the general run
 of what he was saying. he was glad it was a real estate office—he
 was a made man now, sure.
 the colonel said that general boswell was a rich man and had a good and
 growing business; and that washington’s work would be light and he would
 get forty dollars a month and be boarded and lodged in the general’s
 family—which was as good as ten dollars more; and even better, for
 he could not live as well even at the “city hotel” as he would there, and
 yet the hotel charged fifteen dollars a month where a man had a good room.
 general boswell was in his office; a comfortable looking place, with
 plenty of outline maps hanging about the walls and in the windows, and a
 spectacled man was marking out another one on a long table. the office was
 in the principal street. the general received washington with a kindly but
 reserved politeness. washington rather liked his looks. he was about fifty
 years old, dignified, well preserved and well dressed. after the colonel
 took his leave, the general talked a while with washington—his talk
 consisting chiefly of instructions about the clerical duties of the place.
 he seemed satisfied as to washington’s ability to take care of the books,
 he was evidently a pretty fair theoretical bookkeeper, and experience
 would soon harden theory into practice. by and by dinner-time came, and
 the two walked to the general’s house; and now washington noticed an
 instinct in himself that moved him to keep not in the general’s rear,
 exactly, but yet not at his side—somehow the old gentleman’s dignity
 and reserve did not inspire familiarity.
 washington dreamed his way along the street, his fancy flitting from grain
 to hogs, from hogs to banks, from banks to eye-water, from eye-water to
 tennessee land, and lingering but a feverish moment upon each of these
 fascinations. he was conscious of but one outward thing, to wit, the
 general, and he was really not vividly conscious of him.
 arrived at the finest dwelling in the town, they entered it and were at
 home. washington was introduced to mrs. boswell, and his imagination was
 on the point of flitting into the vapory realms of speculation again, when
 a lovely girl of sixteen or seventeen came in. this vision swept
 washington’s mind clear of its chaos of glittering rubbish in an instant.
 beauty had fascinated him before; many times he had been in love even for
 weeks at a time with the same object but his heart had never suffered so
 sudden and so fierce an assault as this, within his recollection.
 louise boswell occupied his mind and drifted among his multiplication
 tables all the afternoon. he was constantly catching himself in a reverie—reveries
 made up of recalling how she looked when she first burst upon him; how her
 voice thrilled him when she first spoke; how charmed the very air seemed
 by her presence. blissful as the afternoon was, delivered up to such a
 revel as this, it seemed an eternity, so impatient was he to see the girl
 again. other afternoons like it followed. washington plunged into this
 love affair as he plunged into everything else—upon impulse and
 without reflection. as the days went by it seemed plain that he was
 growing in favor with louise,—not sweepingly so, but yet
 perceptibly, he fancied. his attentions to her troubled her father and
 mother a little, and they warned louise, without stating particulars or
 making allusions to any special person, that a girl was sure to make a
 mistake who allowed herself to marry anybody but a man who could support
 her well.
 some instinct taught washington that his present lack of money would be an
 obstruction, though possibly not a bar, to his hopes, and straightway his
 poverty became a torture to him which cast all his former sufferings under
 that held into the shade. he longed for riches now as he had never longed
 for them before.
 he had been once or twice to dine with col. sellers, and had been
 discouraged to note that the colonel’s bill of fare was falling off both
 in quantity and quality—a sign, he feared, that the lacking
 ingredient in the eye-water still remained undiscovered—though
 sellers always explained that these changes in the family diet had been
 ordered by the doctor, or suggested by some new scientific work the
 colonel had stumbled upon. but it always turned out that the lacking
 ingredient was still lacking—though it always appeared, at the same
 time, that the colonel was right on its heels.
 every time the colonel came into the real estate office washington’s heart
 bounded and his eyes lighted with hope, but it always turned out that the
 colonel was merely on the scent of some vast, undefined landed speculation—although
 he was customarily able to say that he was nearer to the all-necessary
 ingredient than ever, and could almost name the hour when success would
 dawn. and then washington’s heart would sink again and a sigh would tell
 when it touched bottom.
 about this time a letter came, saying that judge hawkins had been ailing
 for a fortnight, and was now considered to be seriously ill. it was
 thought best that washington should come home. the news filled him with
 grief, for he loved and honored his father; the boswells were touched by
 the youth’s sorrow, and even the general unbent and said encouraging
 things to him.—there was balm in this; but when louise bade him
 good-bye, and shook his hand and said, “don’t be cast down—it will
 all come out right—i know it will all come out right,” it seemed a
 blessed thing to be in misfortune, and the tears that welled up to his
 eyes were the messengers of an adoring and a grateful heart; and when the
 girl saw them and answering tears came into her own eyes, washington could
 hardly contain the excess of happiness that poured into the cavities of
 his breast that were so lately stored to the roof with grief.
 all the way home he nursed his woe and exalted it. he pictured himself as
 she must be picturing him: a noble, struggling young spirit persecuted by
 misfortune, but bravely and patiently waiting in the shadow of a dread
 calamity and preparing to meet the blow as became one who was all too used
 to hard fortune and the pitiless buffetings of fate. these thoughts made
 him weep, and weep more broken-heartedly than ever; and he wished that she
 could see his sufferings now.
 there was nothing significant in the fact that louise, dreamy and
 distraught, stood at her bedroom bureau that night, scribbling
 “washington” here and there over a sheet of paper. but there was something
 significant in the fact that she scratched the word out every time she
 wrote it; examined the erasure critically to see if anybody could guess at
 what the word had been; then buried it under a maze of obliterating lines;
 and finally, as if still unsatisfied, burned the paper.
 when washington reached home, he recognized at once how serious his
 father’s case was. the darkened room, the labored breathing and occasional
 moanings of the patient, the tip-toeing of the attendants and their
 whispered consultations, were full of sad meaning. for three or four
 nights mrs. hawkins and laura had been watching by the bedside; clay had
 arrived, preceding washington by one day, and he was now added to the
 corps of watchers. mr. hawkins would have none but these three, though
 neighborly assistance was offered by old friends. from this time forth
 three-hour watches were instituted, and day and night the watchers kept
 their vigils. by degrees laura and her mother began to show wear, but
 neither of them would yield a minute of their tasks to clay. he ventured
 once to let the midnight hour pass without calling laura, but he ventured
 no more; there was that about her rebuke when he tried to explain, that
 taught him that to let her sleep when she might be ministering to her
 father’s needs, was to rob her of moments that were priceless in her eyes;
 he perceived that she regarded it as a privilege to watch, not a burden.
 and, he had noticed, also, that when midnight struck, the patient turned
 his eyes toward the door, with an expectancy in them which presently grew
 into a longing but brightened into contentment as soon as the door opened
 and laura appeared. and he did not need laura’s rebuke when he heard his
 father say:
 “clay is good, and you are tired, poor child; but i wanted you so.”
 “clay is not good, father—he did not call me. i would not have
 treated him so. how could you do it, clay?”
 clay begged forgiveness and promised not to break faith again; and as he
 betook him to his bed, he said to himself: “it’s a steadfast little soul;
 whoever thinks he is doing the duchess a kindness by intimating that she
 is not sufficient for any undertaking she puts her hand to, makes a
 mistake; and if i did not know it before, i know now that there are surer
 ways of pleasing her than by trying to lighten her labor when that labor
 consists in wearing herself out for the sake of a person she loves.”
 a week drifted by, and all the while the patient sank lower and lower. the
 night drew on that was to end all suspense. it was a wintry one. the
 darkness gathered, the snow was falling, the wind wailed plaintively about
 the house or shook it with fitful gusts. the doctor had paid his last
 visit and gone away with that dismal remark to the nearest friend of the
 family that he “believed there was nothing more that he could do”—a
 remark which is always overheard by some one it is not meant for and
 strikes a lingering half-conscious hope dead with a withering shock; the
 medicine phials had been removed from the bedside and put out of sight,
 and all things made orderly and meet for the solemn event that was
 impending; the patient, with closed eyes, lay scarcely breathing; the
 watchers sat by and wiped the gathering damps from his forehead while the
 silent tears flowed down their faces; the deep hush was only interrupted
 by sobs from the children, grouped about the bed.
 after a time—it was toward midnight now—mr. hawkins roused out
 of a doze, looked about him and was evidently trying to speak. instantly
 laura lifted his head and in a failing voice he said, while something of
 the old light shone in his eyes:
 “wife—children—come nearer—nearer. the darkness grows.
 let me see you all, once more.”
 the group closed together at the bedside, and their tears and sobs came
 now without restraint.
 “i am leaving you in cruel poverty. i have been—so foolish—so
 short-sighted. but courage! a better day is—is coming. never lose
 sight of the tennessee land! be wary. there is wealth stored up for you
 there—wealth that is boundless! the children shall hold up their
 heads with the best in the land, yet. where are the papers?—have you
 got the papers safe? show them—show them to me!”
 under his strong excitement his voice had gathered power and his last
 sentences were spoken with scarcely a perceptible halt or hindrance. with
 an effort he had raised himself almost without assistance to a sitting
 posture. but now the fire faded out of his eyes and he fell back
 exhausted. the papers were brought and held before him, and the answering
 smile that flitted across his face showed that he was satisfied. he closed
 his eyes, and the signs of approaching dissolution multiplied rapidly. he
 lay almost motionless for a little while, then suddenly partly raised his
 head and looked about him as one who peers into a dim uncertain light. he
 muttered:
 “gone? no—i see you—still. it is—it is-over. but you are—safe.
 safe. the ten——-”
 the voice died out in a whisper; the sentence was never finished. the
 emaciated fingers began to pick at the coverlet, a fatal sign. after a
 time there were no sounds but the cries of the mourners within and the
 gusty turmoil of the wind without. laura had bent down and kissed her
 father’s lips as the spirit left the body; but she did not sob, or utter
 any ejaculation; her tears flowed silently. then she closed the dead eyes,
 and crossed the hands upon the breast; after a season, she kissed the
 forehead reverently, drew the sheet up over the face, and then walked
 apart and sat down with the look of one who is done with life and has no
 further interest in its joys and sorrows, its hopes or its ambitions. clay
 buried his face in the coverlet of the bed; when the other children and
 the mother realized that death was indeed come at last, they threw
 themselves into each others’ arms and gave way to a frenzy of grief.
 only two or three days had elapsed since the funeral, when something
 happened which was to change the drift of laura’s life somewhat, and
 influence in a greater or lesser degree the formation of her character.
 major lackland had once been a man of note in the state—a man of
 extraordinary natural ability and as extraordinary learning. he had been
 universally trusted and honored in his day, but had finally, fallen into
 misfortune; while serving his third term in congress, and while upon the
 point of being elevated to the senate—which was considered the
 summit of earthly aggrandizement in those days—he had yielded to
 temptation, when in distress for money wherewith to save his estate; and
 sold his vote. his crime was discovered, and his fall followed instantly.
 nothing could reinstate him in the confidence of the people, his ruin was
 irretrievable—his disgrace complete. all doors were closed against
 him, all men avoided him. after years of skulking retirement and
 dissipation, death had relieved him of his troubles at last, and his
 funeral followed close upon that of mr. hawkins. he died as he had
 latterly lived—wholly alone and friendless. he had no relatives—or
 if he had they did not acknowledge him. the coroner’s jury found certain
 memoranda upon his body and about the premises which revealed a fact not
 suspected by the villagers before-viz., that laura was not the child of
 mr. and mrs. hawkins.
 the gossips were soon at work. they were but little hampered by the fact
 that the memoranda referred to betrayed nothing but the bare circumstance
 that laura’s real parents were unknown, and stopped there. so far from
 being hampered by this, the gossips seemed to gain all the more freedom
 from it. they supplied all the missing information themselves, they filled
 up all the blanks. the town soon teemed with histories of laura’s origin
 and secret history, no two versions precisely alike, but all elaborate,
 exhaustive, mysterious and interesting, and all agreeing in one vital
 particular—to-wit, that there was a suspicious cloud about her
 birth, not to say a disreputable one.
 laura began to encounter cold looks, averted eyes and peculiar nods and
 gestures which perplexed her beyond measure; but presently the pervading
 gossip found its way to her, and she understood them—then. her pride
 was stung. she was astonished, and at first incredulous. she was about to
 ask her mother if there was any truth in these reports, but upon second
 thought held her peace. she soon gathered that major lackland’s memoranda
 seemed to refer to letters which had passed between himself and judge
 hawkins. she shaped her course without difficulty the day that that hint
 reached her.
 that night she sat in her room till all was still, and then she stole into
 the garret and began a search. she rummaged long among boxes of musty
 papers relating to business matters of no interest to her, but at last she
 found several bundles of letters. one bundle was marked “private,” and in
 that she found what she wanted. she selected six or eight letters from the
 package and began to devour their contents, heedless of the cold.
 by the dates, these letters were from five to seven years old. they were
 all from major lackland to mr. hawkins. the substance of them was, that
 some one in the east had been inquiring of major lackland about a lost
 child and its parents, and that it was conjectured that the child might be
 laura.
 evidently some of the letters were missing, for the name of the inquirer
 was not mentioned; there was a casual reference to “this handsome-featured
 aristocratic gentleman,” as if the reader and the writer were accustomed
 to speak of him and knew who was meant.
 in one letter the major said he agreed with mr. hawkins that the inquirer
 seemed not altogether on the wrong track; but he also agreed that it would
 be best to keep quiet until more convincing developments were forthcoming.
 another letter said that “the poor soul broke completely down when he saw
 laura’s picture, and declared it must be she.”
 still another said:
 “he seems entirely alone in the world, and his heart is so wrapped up in
 this thing that i believe that if it proved a false hope, it would kill
 him; i have persuaded him to wait a little while and go west when i go.”
 another letter had this paragraph in it:
 “he is better one day and worse the next, and is out of his mind a good
 deal of the time. lately his case has developed a something which is a
 wonder to the hired nurses, but which will not be much of a marvel to
 you if you have read medical philosophy much. it is this: his lost
 memory returns to him when he is delirious, and goes away again when he
 is himself-just as old canada joe used to talk the french patois of his
 boyhood in the delirium of typhus fever, though he could not do it when
 his mind was clear. now this poor gentleman’s memory has always broken
 down before he reached the explosion of the steamer; he could only
 remember starting up the river with his wife and child, and he had an
 idea that there was a race, but he was not certain; he could not name
 the boat he was on; there was a dead blank of a month or more that
 supplied not an item to his recollection. it was not for me to assist
 him, of course. but now in his delirium it all comes out: the names of
 the boats, every incident of the explosion, and likewise the details of
 his astonishing escape—that is, up to where, just as a yawl-boat
 was approaching him (he was clinging to the starboard wheel of the
 burning wreck at the time), a falling timber struck him on the head. but
 i will write out his wonderful escape in full to-morrow or next day. of
 course the physicians will not let me tell him now that our laura is
 indeed his child—that must come later, when his health is
 thoroughly restored. his case is not considered dangerous at all; he
 will recover presently, the doctors say. but they insist that he must
 travel a little when he gets well—they recommend a short sea
 voyage, and they say he can be persuaded to try it if we continue to
 keep him in ignorance and promise to let him see l. as soon as he
 returns.”
 the letter that bore the latest date of all, contained this clause:
 “it is the most unaccountable thing in the world; the mystery remains as
 impenetrable as ever; i have hunted high and low for him, and inquired
 of everybody, but in vain; all trace of him ends at that hotel in new
 york; i never have seen or heard of him since, up to this day; he could
 hardly have sailed, for his name does not appear upon the books of any
 shipping office in new york or boston or baltimore. how fortunate it
 seems, now, that we kept this thing to ourselves; laura still has a
 father in you, and it is better for her that we drop this subject here
 forever.”
 that was all. random remarks here and there, being pieced together gave
 laura a vague impression of a man of fine presence, about forty-three or
 forty-five years of age, with dark hair and eyes, and a slight limp in his
 walk—it was not stated which leg was defective. and this indistinct
 shadow represented her father. she made an exhaustive search for the
 missing letters, but found none. they had probably been burned; and she
 doubted not that the ones she had ferreted out would have shared the same
 fate if mr. hawkins had not been a dreamer, void of method, whose mind was
 perhaps in a state of conflagration over some bright new speculation when
 he received them.
 she sat long, with the letters in her lap, thinking—and
 unconsciously freezing. she felt like a lost person who has traveled down
 a long lane in good hope of escape, and, just as the night descends finds
 his progress barred by a bridge-less river whose further shore, if it has
 one, is lost in the darkness. if she could only have found these letters a
 month sooner! that was her thought. but now the dead had carried their
 secrets with them. a dreary, melancholy settled down upon her. an
 undefined sense of injury crept into her heart. she grew very miserable.
 she had just reached the romantic age—the age when there is a sad
 sweetness, a dismal comfort to a girl to find out that there is a mystery
 connected with her birth, which no other piece of good luck can afford.
 she had more than her rightful share of practical good sense, but still
 she was human; and to be human is to have one’s little modicum of romance
 secreted away in one’s composition. one never ceases to make a hero of
 one’s self, (in private,) during life, but only alters the style of his
 heroism from time to time as the drifting years belittle certain gods of
 his admiration and raise up others in their stead that seem greater.
 the recent wearing days and nights of watching, and the wasting grief that
 had possessed her, combined with the profound depression that naturally
 came with the reaction of idleness, made laura peculiarly susceptible at
 this time to romantic impressions. she was a heroine, now, with a
 mysterious father somewhere. she could not really tell whether she wanted
 to find him and spoil it all or not; but still all the traditions of
 romance pointed to the making the attempt as the usual and necessary
 course to follow; therefore she would some day begin the search when
 opportunity should offer.
 now a former thought struck her—she would speak to mrs. hawkins. and
 naturally enough mrs. hawkins appeared on the stage at that moment.
 she said she knew all—she knew that laura had discovered the secret
 that mr. hawkins, the elder children, col. sellers and herself had kept so
 long and so faithfully; and she cried and said that now that troubles had
 begun they would never end; her daughter’s love would wean itself away
 from her and her heart would break. her grief so wrought upon laura that
 the girl almost forgot her own troubles for the moment in her compassion
 for her mother’s distress. finally mrs. hawkins said:
 “speak to me, child—do not forsake me. forget all this miserable
 talk. say i am your mother!—i have loved you so long, and there is
 no other. i am your mother, in the sight of god, and nothing shall ever
 take you from me!”
 all barriers fell, before this appeal. laura put her arms about her
 mother’s neck and said:
 “you are my mother, and always shall be. we will be as we have always
 been; and neither this foolish talk nor any other thing shall part us or
 make us less to each other than we are this hour.”
 there was no longer any sense of separation or estrangement between them.
 indeed their love seemed more perfect now than it had ever been before. by
 and by they went down stairs and sat by the fire and talked long and
 earnestly about laura’s history and the letters. but it transpired that
 mrs. hawkins had never known of this correspondence between her husband
 and major lackland. with his usual consideration for his wife, mr. hawkins
 had shielded her from the worry the matter would have caused her.
 laura went to bed at last with a mind that had gained largely in
 tranquility and had lost correspondingly in morbid romantic exaltation.
 she was pensive, the next day, and subdued; but that was not matter for
 remark, for she did not differ from the mournful friends about her in that
 respect. clay and washington were the same loving and admiring brothers
 now that they had always been. the great secret was new to some of the
 younger children, but their love suffered no change under the wonderful
 revelation.
 it is barely possible that things might have presently settled down into
 their old rut and the mystery have lost the bulk of its romantic sublimity
 in laura’s eyes, if the village gossips could have quieted down. but they
 could not quiet down and they did not. day after day they called at the
 house, ostensibly upon visits of condolence, and they pumped away at the
 mother and the children without seeming to know that their questionings
 were in bad taste. they meant no harm they only wanted to know. villagers
 always want to know.
 the family fought shy of the questionings, and of course that was high
 testimony “if the duchess was respectably born, why didn’t they come out
 and prove it?—why did they, stick to that poor thin story about
 picking her up out of a steamboat explosion?”
 under this ceaseless persecution, laura’s morbid self-communing was
 renewed. at night the day’s contribution of detraction, innuendo and
 malicious conjecture would be canvassed in her mind, and then she would
 drift into a course of thinking. as her thoughts ran on, the indignant
 tears would spring to her eyes, and she would spit out fierce little
 ejaculations at intervals. but finally she would grow calmer and say some
 comforting disdainful thing—something like this:
 “but who are they?—animals! what are their opinions to me? let them
 talk—i will not stoop to be affected by it. i could hate——.
 nonsense—nobody i care for or in any way respect is changed toward
 me, i fancy.”
 she may have supposed she was thinking of many individuals, but it was not
 so—she was thinking of only one. and her heart warmed somewhat, too,
 the while. one day a friend overheard a conversation like this:—and
 naturally came and told her all about it:
 “ned, they say you don’t go there any more. how is that?”
 “well, i don’t; but i tell you it’s not because i don’t want to and it’s
 not because i think it is any matter who her father was or who he wasn’t,
 either; it’s only on account of this talk, talk, talk. i think she is a
 fine girl every way, and so would you if you knew her as well as i do; but
 you know how it is when a girl once gets talked about—it’s all up
 with her—the world won’t ever let her alone, after that.”
 the only comment laura made upon this revelation, was:
 “then it appears that if this trouble had not occurred i could have had
 the happiness of mr. ned thurston’s serious attentions. he is well favored
 in person, and well liked, too, i believe, and comes of one of the first
 families of the village. he is prosperous, too, i hear; has been a doctor
 a year, now, and has had two patients—no, three, i think; yes, it
 was three. i attended their funerals. well, other people have hoped and
 been disappointed; i am not alone in that. i wish you could stay to
 dinner, maria—we are going to have sausages; and besides, i wanted
 to talk to you about hawkeye and make you promise to come and see us when
 we are settled there.”
 but maria could not stay. she had come to mingle romantic tears with
 laura’s over the lover’s defection and had found herself dealing with a
 heart that could not rise to an appreciation of affliction because its
 interest was all centred in sausages.
 but as soon as maria was gone, laura stamped her expressive foot and said:
 “the coward! are all books lies? i thought he would fly to the front, and
 be brave and noble, and stand up for me against all the world, and defy my
 enemies, and wither these gossips with his scorn! poor crawling thing, let
 him go. i do begin to despise this world!”
 she lapsed into thought. presently she said:
 “if the time ever comes, and i get a chance, oh, i’ll——”
 she could not find a word that was strong enough, perhaps. by and by she
 said:
 “well, i am glad of it—i’m glad of it. i never cared anything for
 him anyway!”
 and then, with small consistency, she cried a little, and patted her foot
 more indignantly than ever.
 two months had gone by and the hawkins family were domiciled in hawkeye.
 washington was at work in the real estate office again, and was
 alternately in paradise or the other place just as it happened that louise
 was gracious to him or seemingly indifferent—because indifference or
 preoccupation could mean nothing else than that she was thinking of some
 other young person. col. sellers had asked him several times, to dine with
 him, when he first returned to hawkeye, but washington, for no particular
 reason, had not accepted. no particular reason except one which he
 preferred to keep to himself—viz. that he could not bear to be away
 from louise. it occurred to him, now, that the colonel had not invited him
 lately—could he be offended? he resolved to go that very day, and
 give the colonel a pleasant surprise. it was a good idea; especially as
 louise had absented herself from breakfast that morning, and torn his
 heart; he would tear hers, now, and let her see how it felt.
 the sellers family were just starting to dinner when washington burst upon
 them with his surprise. for an instant the colonel looked nonplussed, and
 just a bit uncomfortable; and mrs. sellers looked actually distressed; but
 the next moment the head of the house was himself again, and exclaimed:
 “all right, my boy, all right—always glad to see you—always
 glad to hear your voice and take you by the hand. don’t wait for special
 invitations—that’s all nonsense among friends. just come whenever
 you can, and come as often as you can—the oftener the better. you
 can’t please us any better than that, washington; the little woman will
 tell you so herself. we don’t pretend to style. plain folks, you know—plain
 folks. just a plain family dinner, but such as it is, our friends are
 always welcome, i reckon you know that yourself, washington. run along,
 children, run along; lafayette,—[**in those old days the average man
 called his children after his most revered literary and historical idols;
 consequently there was hardly a family, at least in the west, but had a
 washington in it—and also a lafayette, a franklin, and six or eight
 sounding names from byron, scott, and the bible, if the offspring held
 out. to visit such a family, was to find one’s self confronted by a
 congress made up of representatives of the imperial myths and the majestic
 dead of all the ages. there was something thrilling about it, to a
 stranger, not to say awe inspiring.]—stand off the cat’s tail,
 child, can’t you see what you’re doing?—come, come, come, roderick
 dhu, it isn’t nice for little boys to hang onto young gentlemen’s coat
 tails—but never mind him, washington, he’s full of spirits and don’t
 mean any harm. children will be children, you know. take the chair next to
 mrs. sellers, washington—tut, tut, marie antoinette, let your
 brother have the fork if he wants it, you are bigger than he is.”
 washington contemplated the banquet, and wondered if he were in his right
 mind. was this the plain family dinner? and was it all present? it was
 soon apparent that this was indeed the dinner: it was all on the table: it
 consisted of abundance of clear, fresh water, and a basin of raw turnips—nothing
 more.
 washington stole a glance at mrs. sellers’s face, and would have given the
 world, the next moment, if he could have spared her that. the poor woman’s
 face was crimson, and the tears stood in her eyes. washington did not know
 what to do. he wished he had never come there and spied out this cruel
 poverty and brought pain to that poor little lady’s heart and shame to her
 cheek; but he was there, and there was no escape. col. sellers hitched
 back his coat sleeves airily from his wrists as who should say “now for
 solid enjoyment!” seized a fork, flourished it and began to harpoon
 turnips and deposit them in the plates before him “let me help you,
 washington—lafayette, pass this plate to washington—ah, well,
 well, my boy, things are looking pretty bright, now, i tell you.
 speculation—my! the whole atmosphere’s full of money. i would’nt
 take three fortunes for one little operation i’ve got on hand now—have
 anything from the casters? no? well, you’re right, you’re right. some
 people like mustard with turnips, but—now there was baron
 poniatowski—lord, but that man did know how to live!—true
 russian you know, russian to the back bone; i say to my wife, give me a
 russian every time, for a table comrade. the baron used to say, ‘take
 mustard, sellers, try the mustard,—a man can’t know what turnips are
 in perfection without, mustard,’ but i always said, ‘no, baron, i’m a
 plain man and i want my food plain—none of your embellishments for
 beriah sellers—no made dishes for me! and it’s the best way—high
 living kills more than it cures in this world, you can rest assured of
 that.—yes indeed, washington, i’ve got one little operation on hand
 that—take some more water—help yourself, won’t you?—help
 yourself, there’s plenty of it.—you’ll find it pretty good, i guess.
 how does that fruit strike you?”
 washington said he did not know that he had ever tasted better. he did not
 add that he detested turnips even when they were cooked—loathed them
 in their natural state. no, he kept this to himself, and praised the
 turnips to the peril of his soul.
 “i thought you’d like them. examine them—examine them—they’ll
 bear it. see how perfectly firm and juicy they are—they can’t start
 any like them in this part of the country, i can tell you. these are from
 new jersey—i imported them myself. they cost like sin, too; but lord
 bless me, i go in for having the best of a thing, even if it does cost a
 little more—it’s the best economy, in the long run. these are the
 early malcolm—it’s a turnip that can’t be produced except in just
 one orchard, and the supply never is up to the demand. take some more
 water, washington—you can’t drink too much water with fruit—all
 the doctors say that. the plague can’t come where this article is, my
 boy!”
 “plague? what plague?”
 “what plague, indeed? why the asiatic plague that nearly depopulated
 london a couple of centuries ago.”
 “but how does that concern us? there is no plague here, i reckon.”
 “sh! i’ve let it out! well, never mind—just keep it to yourself.
 perhaps i oughtn’t said anything, but its bound to come out sooner or
 later, so what is the odds? old mcdowells wouldn’t like me to—to—bother
 it all, i’ll jest tell the whole thing and let it go. you see, i’ve been
 down to st. louis, and i happened to run across old dr. mcdowells—thinks
 the world of me, does the doctor. he’s a man that keeps himself to
 himself, and well he may, for he knows that he’s got a reputation that
 covers the whole earth—he won’t condescend to open himself out to
 many people, but lord bless you, he and i are just like brothers; he won’t
 let me go to a hotel when i’m in the city—says i’m the only man
 that’s company to him, and i don’t know but there’s some truth in it, too,
 because although i never like to glorify myself and make a great to-do
 over what i am or what i can do or what i know, i don’t mind saying here
 among friends that i am better read up in most sciences, maybe, than the
 general run of professional men in these days. well, the other day he let
 me into a little secret, strictly on the quiet, about this matter of the
 plague.
 “you see it’s booming right along in our direction—follows the gulf
 stream, you know, just as all those epidemics do, and within three months
 it will be just waltzing through this land like a whirlwind! and whoever
 it touches can make his will and contract for the funeral. well you can’t
 cure it, you know, but you can prevent it. how? turnips! that’s it!
 turnips and water! nothing like it in the world, old mcdowells says, just
 fill yourself up two or three times a day, and you can snap your fingers
 at the plague. sh!—keep mum, but just you confine yourself to that
 diet and you’re all right. i wouldn’t have old mcdowells know that i told
 about it for anything—he never would speak to me again. take some
 more water, washington—the more water you drink, the better. here,
 let me give you some more of the turnips. no, no, no, now, i insist.
 there, now. absorb those. they’re, mighty sustaining—brim full of
 nutriment—all the medical books say so. just eat from four to seven
 good-sized turnips at a meal, and drink from a pint and a half to a quart
 of water, and then just sit around a couple of hours and let them ferment.
 you’ll feel like a fighting cock next day.”
 fifteen or twenty minutes later the colonel’s tongue was still chattering
 away—he had piled up several future fortunes out of several
 incipient “operations” which he had blundered into within the past week,
 and was now soaring along through some brilliant expectations born of late
 promising experiments upon the lacking ingredient of the eye-water. and at
 such a time washington ought to have been a rapt and enthusiastic
 listener, but he was not, for two matters disturbed his mind and
 distracted his attention. one was, that he discovered, to his confusion
 and shame, that in allowing himself to be helped a second time to the
 turnips, he had robbed those hungry children. he had not needed the
 dreadful “fruit,” and had not wanted it; and when he saw the pathetic
 sorrow in their faces when they asked for more and there was no more to
 give them, he hated himself for his stupidity and pitied the famishing
 young things with all his heart. the other matter that disturbed him was
 the dire inflation that had begun in his stomach. it grew and grew, it
 became more and more insupportable. evidently the turnips were
 “fermenting.” he forced himself to sit still as long as he could, but his
 anguish conquered him at last.
 he rose in the midst of the colonel’s talk and excused himself on the plea
 of a previous engagement. the colonel followed him to the door, promising
 over and over again that he would use his influence to get some of the
 early malcolms for him, and insisting that he should not be such a
 stranger but come and take pot-luck with him every chance he got.
 washington was glad enough to get away and feel free again. he immediately
 bent his steps toward home.
 in bed he passed an hour that threatened to turn his hair gray, and then a
 blessed calm settled down upon him that filled his heart with gratitude.
 weak and languid, he made shift to turn himself about and seek rest and
 sleep; and as his soul hovered upon the brink of unconciousness, he heaved
 a long, deep sigh, and said to himself that in his heart he had cursed the
 colonel’s preventive of rheumatism, before, and now let the plague come if
 it must—he was done with preventives; if ever any man beguiled him
 with turnips and water again, let him die the death.
 if he dreamed at all that night, no gossiping spirit disturbed his visions
 to whisper in his ear of certain matters just then in bud in the east,
 more than a thousand miles away that after the lapse of a few years would
 develop influences which would profoundly affect the fate and fortunes of
 the hawkins family.
 “oh, it’s easy enough to make a fortune,” henry said.
 “it seems to be easier than it is, i begin to think,” replied philip.
 “well, why don’t you go into something? you’ll never dig it out of the
 astor library.”
 if there be any place and time in the world where and when it seems easy
 to “go into something” it is in broadway on a spring morning, when one is
 walking city-ward, and has before him the long lines of palace-shops with
 an occasional spire seen through the soft haze that lies over the lower
 town, and hears the roar and hum of its multitudinous traffic.
 to the young american, here or elsewhere, the paths to fortune are
 innumerable and all open; there is invitation in the air and success in
 all his wide horizon. he is embarrassed which to choose, and is not
 unlikely to waste years in dallying with his chances, before giving
 himself to the serious tug and strain of a single object. he has no
 traditions to bind him or guide him, and his impulse is to break away from
 the occupation his father has followed, and make a new way for himself.
 philip sterling used to say that if he should seriously set himself for
 ten years to any one of the dozen projects that were in his brain, he felt
 that he could be a rich man. he wanted to be rich, he had a sincere desire
 for a fortune, but for some unaccountable reason he hesitated about
 addressing himself to the narrow work of getting it. he never walked
 broadway, a part of its tide of abundant shifting life, without feeling
 something of the flush of wealth, and unconsciously taking the elastic
 step of one well-to-do in this prosperous world.
 especially at night in the crowded theatre—philip was too young to
 remember the old chambers’ street box, where the serious burton led his
 hilarious and pagan crew—in the intervals of the screaming comedy,
 when the orchestra scraped and grunted and tooted its dissolute tunes, the
 world seemed full of opportunities to philip, and his heart exulted with a
 conscious ability to take any of its prizes he chose to pluck.
 perhaps it was the swimming ease of the acting, on the stage, where virtue
 had its reward in three easy acts, perhaps it was the excessive light of
 the house, or the music, or the buzz of the excited talk between acts,
 perhaps it was youth which believed everything, but for some reason while
 philip was at the theatre he had the utmost confidence in life and his
 ready victory in it.
 delightful illusion of paint and tinsel and silk attire, of cheap
 sentiment and high and mighty dialogue! will there not always be rosin
 enough for the squeaking fiddle-bow?
 do we not all like the maudlin hero, who is sneaking round the right
 entrance, in wait to steal the pretty wife of his rich and tyrannical
 neighbor from the paste-board cottage at the left entrance? and when he
 advances down to the foot-lights and defiantly informs the audience that,
 “he who lays his hand on a woman except in the way of kindness,” do we not
 all applaud so as to drown the rest of the sentence?
 philip never was fortunate enough to hear what would become of a man who
 should lay his hand on a woman with the exception named; but he learned
 afterwards that the woman who lays her hand on a man, without any
 exception whatsoever, is always acquitted by the jury.
 the fact was, though philip sterling did not know it, that he wanted
 several other things quite as much as he wanted wealth. the modest fellow
 would have liked fame thrust upon him for some worthy achievement; it
 might be for a book, or for the skillful management of some great
 newspaper, or for some daring expedition like that of lt. strain or dr.
 kane. he was unable to decide exactly what it should be. sometimes he
 thought he would like to stand in a conspicuous pulpit and humbly preach
 the gospel of repentance; and it even crossed his mind that it would be
 noble to give himself to a missionary life to some benighted region, where
 the date-palm grows, and the nightingale’s voice is in tune, and the
 bul-bul sings on the off nights. if he were good enough he would attach
 himself to that company of young men in the theological seminary, who were
 seeing new york life in preparation for the ministry.
 philip was a new england boy and had graduated at yale; he had not carried
 off with him all the learning of that venerable institution, but he knew
 some things that were not in the regular course of study. a very good use
 of the english language and considerable knowledge of its literature was
 one of them; he could sing a song very well, not in time to be sure, but
 with enthusiasm; he could make a magnetic speech at a moment’s notice in
 the class room, the debating society, or upon any fence or dry-goods box
 that was convenient; he could lift himself by one arm, and do the giant
 swing in the gymnasium; he could strike out from his left shoulder; he
 could handle an oar like a professional and pull stroke in a winning race.
 philip had a good appetite, a sunny temper, and a clear hearty laugh. he
 had brown hair, hazel eyes set wide apart, a broad but not high forehead,
 and a fresh winning face. he was six feet high, with broad shoulders, long
 legs and a swinging gait; one of those loose-jointed, capable fellows, who
 saunter into the world with a free air and usually make a stir in whatever
 company they enter.
 after he left college philip took the advice of friends and read law. law
 seemed to him well enough as a science, but he never could discover a
 practical case where it appeared to him worth while to go to law, and all
 the clients who stopped with this new clerk in the ante-room of the law
 office where he was writing, philip invariably advised to settle—no
 matter how, but settle—greatly to the disgust of his employer, who
 knew that justice between man and man could only be attained by the
 recognized processes, with the attendant fees. besides philip hated the
 copying of pleadings, and he was certain that a life of “whereases” and
 “aforesaids” and whipping the devil round the stump, would be intolerable.
 [note: these few paragraphs are nearly an autobiography of the life of
 charles dudley warner whose contributions to the story start here with
 chapter xii. d.w.]
 his pen therefore, and whereas, and not as aforesaid, strayed off into
 other scribbling. in an unfortunate hour, he had two or three papers
 accepted by first-class magazines, at three dollars the printed page, and,
 behold, his vocation was open to him. he would make his mark in
 literature.
 life has no moment so sweet as that in which a young man believes himself
 called into the immortal ranks of the masters of literature. it is such a
 noble ambition, that it is a pity it has usually such a shallow
 foundation.
 at the time of this history, philip had gone to new york for a career.
 with his talent he thought he should have little difficulty in getting an
 editorial position upon a metropolitan newspaper; not that he knew
 anything about newspaper work, or had the least idea of journalism; he
 knew he was not fitted for the technicalities of the subordinate
 departments, but he could write leaders with perfect ease, he was sure.
 the drudgery of the newspaper office was too distasteful, and besides it
 would be beneath the dignity of a graduate and a successful magazine
 writer. he wanted to begin at the top of the ladder.
 to his surprise he found that every situation in the editorial department
 of the journals was full, always had been full, was always likely to be
 full. it seemed to him that the newspaper managers didn’t want genius, but
 mere plodding and grubbing. philip therefore read diligently in the astor
 library, planned literary works that should compel attention, and nursed
 his genius. he had no friend wise enough to tell him to step into the
 dorking convention, then in session, make a sketch of the men and women on
 the platform, and take it to the editor of the daily grapevine, and see
 what he could get a line for it.
 one day he had an offer from some country friends, who believed in him, to
 take charge of a provincial daily newspaper, and he went to consult mr.
 gringo—gringo who years ago managed the atlas—about taking the
 situation.
 “take it of course,” says gringo, “take anything that offers, why not?”
 “but they want me to make it an opposition paper.”
 “well, make it that. that party is going to succeed, it’s going to elect
 the next president.”
 “i don’t believe it,” said philip, stoutly, “its wrong in principle, and
 it ought not to succeed, but i don’t see how i can go for a thing i don’t
 believe in.”
 “o, very well,” said gringo, turning away with a shade of contempt,
 “you’ll find if you are going into literature and newspaper work that you
 can’t afford a conscience like that.”
 but philip did afford it, and he wrote, thanking his friends, and
 declining because he said the political scheme would fail, and ought to
 fail. and he went back to his books and to his waiting for an opening
 large enough for his dignified entrance into the literary world.
 it was in this time of rather impatient waiting that philip was one
 morning walking down broadway with henry brierly. he frequently
 accompanied henry part way down town to what the latter called his office
 in broad street, to which he went, or pretended to go, with regularity
 every day. it was evident to the most casual acquaintance that he was a
 man of affairs, and that his time was engrossed in the largest sort of
 operations, about which there was a mysterious air. his liability to be
 suddenly summoned to washington, or boston or montreal or even to
 liverpool was always imminent. he never was so summoned, but none of his
 acquaintances would have been surprised to hear any day that he had gone
 to panama or peoria, or to hear from him that he had bought the bank of
 commerce.
 the two were intimate at that time,—they had been classmates—and
 saw a great deal of each other. indeed, they lived together in ninth
 street, in a boarding-house, there, which had the honor of lodging and
 partially feeding several other young fellows of like kidney, who have
 since gone their several ways into fame or into obscurity.
 it was during the morning walk to which reference has been made that henry
 brierly suddenly said, “philip, how would you like to go to st. jo?”
 “i think i should like it of all things,” replied philip, with some
 hesitation, “but what for.”
 “oh, it’s a big operation. we are going, a lot of us, railroad men,
 engineers, contractors. you know my uncle is a great railroad man. i’ve no
 doubt i can get you a chance to go if you’ll go.”
 “but in what capacity would i go?”
 “well, i’m going as an engineer. you can go as one.”
 “i don’t know an engine from a coal cart.”
 “field engineer, civil engineer. you can begin by carrying a rod, and
 putting down the figures. it’s easy enough. i’ll show you about that.
 we’ll get trautwine and some of those books.”
 “yes, but what is it for, what is it all about?”
 “why don’t you see? we lay out a line, spot the good land, enter it up,
 know where the stations are to be, spot them, buy lots; there’s heaps of
 money in it. we wouldn’t engineer long.”
 “when do you go?” was philip’s next question, after some moments of
 silence.
 “to-morrow. is that too soon?”
 “no, its not too soon. i’ve been ready to go anywhere for six months. the
 fact is, henry, that i’m about tired of trying to force myself into
 things, and am quite willing to try floating with the stream for a while,
 and see where i will land. this seems like a providential call; it’s
 sudden enough.”
 the two young men who were by this time full of the adventure, went down
 to the wall street office of henry’s uncle and had a talk with that wily
 operator. the uncle knew philip very well, and was pleased with his frank
 enthusiasm, and willing enough to give him a trial in the western venture.
 it was settled therefore, in the prompt way in which things are settled in
 new york, that they would start with the rest of the company next morning
 for the west.
 on the way up town these adventurers bought books on engineering, and
 suits of india-rubber, which they supposed they would need in a new and
 probably damp country, and many other things which nobody ever needed
 anywhere.
 the night was spent in packing up and writing letters, for philip would
 not take such an important step without informing his friends. if they
 disapprove, thought he, i’ve done my duty by letting them know. happy
 youth, that is ready to pack its valise, and start for cathay on an hour’s
 notice.
 “by the way,” calls out philip from his bed-room, to henry, “where is st.
 jo.?”
 “why, it’s in missouri somewhere, on the frontier i think. we’ll get a
 map.”
 “never mind the map. we will find the place itself. i was afraid it was
 nearer home.”
 philip wrote a long letter, first of all, to his mother, full of love and
 glowing anticipations of his new opening. he wouldn’t bother her with
 business details, but he hoped that the day was not far off when she would
 see him return, with a moderate fortune, and something to add to the
 comfort of her advancing years.
 to his uncle he said that he had made an arrangement with some new york
 capitalists to go to missouri, in a land and railroad operation, which
 would at least give him a knowledge of the world and not unlikely offer
 him a business opening. he knew his uncle would be glad to hear that he
 had at last turned his thoughts to a practical matter.
 it was to ruth bolton that philip wrote last. he might never see her
 again; he went to seek his fortune. he well knew the perils of the
 frontier, the savage state of society, the lurking indians and the dangers
 of fever. but there was no real danger to a person who took care of
 himself. might he write to her often and, tell her of his life. if he
 returned with a fortune, perhaps and perhaps. if he was unsuccessful, or
 if he never returned—perhaps it would be as well. no time or
 distance, however, would ever lessen his interest in her. he would say
 good-night, but not good-bye.
 in the soft beginning of a spring morning, long before new york had
 breakfasted, while yet the air of expectation hung about the wharves of
 the metropolis, our young adventurers made their way to the jersey city
 railway station of the erie road, to begin the long, swinging, crooked
 journey, over what a writer of a former day called a causeway of cracked
 rails and cows, to the west.
 what ever to say be toke in his entente, his langage was so
 fayer & pertynante, yt semeth unto manys herying not only the
 worde, but veryly the thyng. caxton’s book of curtesye.
 in the party of which our travelers found themselves members, was duff
 brown, the great railroad contractor, and subsequently a well-known member
 of congress; a bluff, jovial bost’n man, thick-set, close shaven, with a
 heavy jaw and a low forehead—a very pleasant man if you were not in
 his way. he had government contracts also, custom houses and dry docks,
 from portland to new orleans, and managed to get out of congress, in
 appropriations, about weight for weight of gold for the stone furnished.
 associated with him, and also of this party, was rodney schaick, a sleek
 new york broker, a man as prominent in the church as in the stock
 exchange, dainty in his dress, smooth of speech, the necessary complement
 of duff brown in any enterprise that needed assurance and adroitness.
 it would be difficult to find a pleasanter traveling party, one that shook
 off more readily the artificial restraints of puritanic strictness, and
 took the world with good-natured allowance. money was plenty for every
 attainable luxury, and there seemed to be no doubt that its supply would
 continue, and that fortunes were about to be made without a great deal of
 toil. even philip soon caught the prevailing spirit; barry did not need
 any inoculation, he always talked in six figures. it was as natural for
 the dear boy to be rich as it is for most people to be poor.
 the elders of the party were not long in discovering the fact, which
 almost all travelers to the west soon find out; that the water was poor.
 it must have been by a lucky premonition of this that they all had brandy
 flasks with which to qualify the water of the country; and it was no doubt
 from an uneasy feeling of the danger of being poisoned that they kept
 experimenting, mixing a little of the dangerous and changing fluid, as
 they passed along, with the contents of the flasks, thus saving their
 lives hour by hour. philip learned afterwards that temperance and the
 strict observance of sunday and a certain gravity of deportment are
 geographical habits, which people do not usually carry with them away from
 home.
 our travelers stopped in chicago long enough to see that they could make
 their fortunes there in two week’s time, but it did not seem worth while;
 the west was more attractive; the further one went the wider the
 opportunities opened.
 they took railroad to alton and the steamboat from there to st. louis, for
 the change and to have a glimpse of the river.
 “isn’t this jolly?” cried henry, dancing out of the barber’s room, and
 coming down the deck with a one, two, three step, shaven, curled and
 perfumed after his usual exquisite fashion.
 “what’s jolly?” asked philip, looking out upon the dreary and monotonous
 waste through which the shaking steamboat was coughing its way.
 “why, the whole thing; it’s immense i can tell you. i wouldn’t give that
 to be guaranteed a hundred thousand cold cash in a year’s time.”
 “where’s mr. brown?”
 “he is in the saloon, playing poker with schaick and that long haired
 party with the striped trousers, who scrambled aboard when the stage plank
 was half hauled in, and the big delegate to congress from out west.”
 “that’s a fine looking fellow, that delegate, with his glossy, black
 whiskers; looks like a washington man; i shouldn’t think he’d be at
 poker.”
 “oh, its only five cent ante, just to make it interesting, the delegate
 said.”
 “but i shouldn’t think a representative in congress would play poker any
 way in a public steamboat.”
 “nonsense, you’ve got to pass the time. i tried a hand myself, but those
 old fellows are too many for me. the delegate knows all the points. i’d
 bet a hundred dollars he will ante his way right into the united states
 senate when his territory comes in. he’s got the cheek for it.”
 “he has the grave and thoughtful manner of expectoration of a public man,
 for one thing,” added philip.
 “harry,” said philip, after a pause, “what have you got on those big boots
 for; do you expect to wade ashore?”
 “i’m breaking ’em in.”
 the fact was harry had got himself up in what he thought a proper costume
 for a new country, and was in appearance a sort of compromise between a
 dandy of broadway and a backwoodsman. harry, with blue eyes, fresh
 complexion, silken whiskers and curly chestnut hair, was as handsome as a
 fashion plate. he wore this morning a soft hat, a short cutaway coat, an
 open vest displaying immaculate linen, a leathern belt round his waist,
 and top-boots of soft leather, well polished, that came above his knees
 and required a string attached to his belt to keep them up. the light
 hearted fellow gloried in these shining encasements of his well shaped
 legs, and told philip that they were a perfect protection against prairie
 rattle-snakes, which never strike above the knee.
 the landscape still wore an almost wintry appearance when our travelers
 left chicago. it was a genial spring day when they landed at st. louis;
 the birds were singing, the blossoms of peach trees in city garden plots,
 made the air sweet, and in the roar and tumult on the long river levee
 they found an excitement that accorded with their own hopeful
 anticipations.
 the party went to the southern hotel, where the great duff brown was very
 well known, and indeed was a man of so much importance that even the
 office clerk was respectful to him. he might have respected in him also a
 certain vulgar swagger and insolence of money, which the clerk greatly
 admired.
 the young fellows liked the house and liked the city; it seemed to them a
 mighty free and hospitable town. coming from the east they were struck
 with many peculiarities. everybody smoked in the streets, for one thing,
 they noticed; everybody “took a drink” in an open manner whenever he
 wished to do so or was asked, as if the habit needed no concealment or
 apology. in the evening when they walked about they found people sitting
 on the door-steps of their dwellings, in a manner not usual in a northern
 city; in front of some of the hotels and saloons the side walks were
 filled with chairs and benches—paris fashion, said harry—upon
 which people lounged in these warm spring evenings, smoking, always
 smoking; and the clink of glasses and of billiard balls was in the air. it
 was delightful.
 harry at once found on landing that his back-woods custom would not be
 needed in st. louis, and that, in fact, he had need of all the resources
 of his wardrobe to keep even with the young swells of the town. but this
 did not much matter, for harry was always superior to his clothes. as they
 were likely to be detained some time in the city, harry told philip that
 he was going to improve his time. and he did. it was an encouragement to
 any industrious man to see this young fellow rise, carefully dress
 himself, eat his breakfast deliberately, smoke his cigar tranquilly, and
 then repair to his room, to what he called his work, with a grave and
 occupied manner, but with perfect cheerfulness.
 harry would take off his coat, remove his cravat, roll up his
 shirt-sleeves, give his curly hair the right touch before the glass, get
 out his book on engineering, his boxes of instruments, his drawing paper,
 his profile paper, open the book of logarithms, mix his india ink, sharpen
 his pencils, light a cigar, and sit down at the table to “lay out a line,”
 with the most grave notion that he was mastering the details of
 engineering. he would spend half a day in these preparations without ever
 working out a problem or having the faintest conception of the use of
 lines or logarithms. and when he had finished, he had the most cheerful
 confidence that he had done a good day’s work.
 it made no difference, however, whether harry was in his room in a hotel
 or in a tent, philip soon found, he was just the same. in camp he would
 get himself up in the most elaborate toilet at his command, polish his
 long boots to the top, lay out his work before him, and spend an hour or
 longer, if anybody was looking at him, humming airs, knitting his brows,
 and “working” at engineering; and if a crowd of gaping rustics were
 looking on all the while it was perfectly satisfactory to him.
 “you see,” he says to philip one morning at the hotel when he was thus
 engaged, “i want to get the theory of this thing, so that i can have a
 check on the engineers.”
 “i thought you were going to be an engineer yourself,” queried philip.
 “not many times, if the court knows herself. there’s better game. brown
 and schaick have, or will have, the control for the whole line of the salt
 lick pacific extension, forty thousand dollars a mile over the prairie,
 with extra for hard-pan—and it’ll be pretty much all hardpan i can
 tell you; besides every alternate section of land on this line. there’s
 millions in the job. i’m to have the sub-contract for the first fifty
 miles, and you can bet it’s a soft thing.”
 “i’ll tell you what you do, philip,” continued larry, in a burst of
 generosity, “if i don’t get you into my contract, you’ll be with the
 engineers, and you jest stick a stake at the first ground marked for a
 depot, buy the land of the farmer before he knows where the depot will be,
 and we’ll turn a hundred or so on that. i’ll advance the money for the
 payments, and you can sell the lots. schaick is going to let me have ten
 thousand just for a flyer in such operations.”
 “but that’s a good deal of money.”
 “wait till you are used to handling money. i didn’t come out here for a
 bagatelle. my uncle wanted me to stay east and go in on the mobile custom
 house, work up the washington end of it; he said there was a fortune in it
 for a smart young fellow, but i preferred to take the chances out here.
 did i tell you i had an offer from bobbett and fanshaw to go into their
 office as confidential clerk on a salary of ten thousand?”
 “why didn’t you take it?” asked philip, to whom a salary of two thousand
 would have seemed wealth, before he started on this journey.
 “take it? i’d rather operate on my own hook;” said harry, in his most airy
 manner.
 a few evenings after their arrival at the southern, philip and harry made
 the acquaintance of a very agreeable gentleman, whom they had frequently
 seen before about the hotel corridors, and passed a casual word with. he
 had the air of a man of business, and was evidently a person of
 importance.
 the precipitating of this casual intercourse into the more substantial
 form of an acquaintanceship was the work of the gentleman himself, and
 occurred in this wise. meeting the two friends in the lobby one evening,
 he asked them to give him the time, and added:
 “excuse me, gentlemen—strangers in st. louis? ah, yes-yes. from the
 east, perhaps? ah; just so, just so. eastern born myself—virginia.
 sellers is my name—beriah sellers.
 “ah! by the way—new york, did you say? that reminds me; just met
 some gentlemen from your state, a week or two ago—very prominent
 gentlemen—in public life they are; you must know them, without
 doubt. let me see—let me see. curious those names have escaped me. i
 know they were from your state, because i remember afterward my old friend
 governor shackleby said to me—fine man, is the governor—one of
 the finest men our country has produced—said he, ‘colonel, how did
 you like those new york gentlemen?—not many such men in the world,—colonel
 sellers,’ said the governor—yes, it was new york he said—i
 remember it distinctly. i can’t recall those names, somehow. but no
 matter. stopping here, gentlemen—stopping at the southern?”
 in shaping their reply in their minds, the title “mr.” had a place in it;
 but when their turn had arrived to speak, the title “colonel” came from
 their lips instead.
 they said yes, they were abiding at the southern, and thought it a very
 good house.
 “yes, yes, the southern is fair. i myself go to the planter’s, old,
 aristocratic house. we southern gentlemen don’t change our ways, you know.
 i always make it my home there when i run down from hawkeye—my
 plantation is in hawkeye, a little up in the country. you should know the
 planter’s.”
 philip and harry both said they should like to see a hotel that had been
 so famous in its day—a cheerful hostelrie, philip said it must have
 been where duels were fought there across the dining-room table.
 “you may believe it, sir, an uncommonly pleasant lodging. shall we walk?”
 and the three strolled along the streets, the colonel talking all the way
 in the most liberal and friendly manner, and with a frank open-heartedness
 that inspired confidence.
 “yes, born east myself, raised all along, know the west—a great
 country, gentlemen. the place for a young fellow of spirit to pick up a
 fortune, simply pick it up, it’s lying round loose here. not a day that i
 don’t put aside an opportunity; too busy to look into it. management of my
 own property takes my time. first visit? looking for an opening?”
 “yes, looking around,” replied harry.
 “ah, here we are. you’d rather sit here in front than go to my apartments?
 so had i. an opening eh?”
 the colonel’s eyes twinkled. “ah, just so. the country is opening up, all
 we want is capital to develop it. slap down the rails and bring the land
 into market. the richest land on god almighty’s footstool is lying right
 out there. if i had my capital free i could plant it for millions.”
 “i suppose your capital is largely in your plantation?” asked philip.
 “well, partly, sir, partly. i’m down here now with reference to a little
 operation—a little side thing merely. by the way gentlemen, excuse
 the liberty, but it’s about my usual time”—
 the colonel paused, but as no movement of his acquaintances followed this
 plain remark, he added, in an explanatory manner,
 “i’m rather particular about the exact time—have to be in this
 climate.”
 even this open declaration of his hospitable intention not being
 understood the colonel politely said,
 “gentlemen, will you take something?”
 col. sellers led the way to a saloon on fourth street under the hotel, and
 the young gentlemen fell into the custom of the country.
 “not that,” said the colonel to the bar-keeper, who shoved along the
 counter a bottle of apparently corn-whiskey, as if he had done it before
 on the same order; “not that,” with a wave of the hand. “that otard if you
 please. yes. never take an inferior liquor, gentlemen, not in the evening,
 in this climate. there. that’s the stuff. my respects!”
 the hospitable gentleman, having disposed of his liquor, remarking that it
 was not quite the thing—“when a man has his own cellar to go to, he
 is apt to get a little fastidious about his liquors”—called for
 cigars. but the brand offered did not suit him; he motioned the box away,
 and asked for some particular havana’s, those in separate wrappers.
 “i always smoke this sort, gentlemen; they are a little more expensive,
 but you’ll learn, in this climate, that you’d better not economize on poor
 cigars.”
 having imparted this valuable piece of information, the colonel lighted
 the fragrant cigar with satisfaction, and then carelessly put his fingers
 into his right vest pocket. that movement being without result, with a
 shade of disappointment on his face, he felt in his left vest pocket. not
 finding anything there, he looked up with a serious and annoyed air,
 anxiously slapped his right pantaloon’s pocket, and then his left, and
 exclaimed,
 “by george, that’s annoying. by george, that’s mortifying. never had
 anything of that kind happen to me before. i’ve left my pocket-book. hold!
 here’s a bill, after all. no, thunder, it’s a receipt.”
 “allow me,” said philip, seeing how seriously the colonel was annoyed, and
 taking out his purse.
 the colonel protested he couldn’t think of it, and muttered something to
 the barkeeper about “hanging it up,” but the vender of exhilaration made
 no sign, and philip had the privilege of paying the costly shot; col.
 sellers profusely apologizing and claiming the right “next time, next
 time.”
 as soon as beriah sellers had bade his friends good night and seen them
 depart, he did not retire apartments in the planter’s, but took his way to
 his lodgings with a friend in a distant part of the city.
 the letter that philip sterling wrote to ruth bolton, on the evening of
 setting out to seek his fortune in the west, found that young lady in her
 own father’s house in philadelphia. it was one of the pleasantest of the
 many charming suburban houses in that hospitable city, which is
 territorially one of the largest cities in the world, and only prevented
 from becoming the convenient metropolis of the country by the intrusive
 strip of camden and amboy sand which shuts it off from the atlantic ocean.
 it is a city of steady thrift, the arms of which might well be the
 deliberate but delicious terrapin that imparts such a royal flavor to its
 feasts.
 it was a spring morning, and perhaps it was the influence of it that made
 ruth a little restless, satisfied neither with the out-doors nor the
 in-doors. her sisters had gone to the city to show some country visitors
 independence hall, girard college and fairmount water works and park, four
 objects which americans cannot die peacefully, even in naples, without
 having seen. but ruth confessed that she was tired of them, and also of
 the mint. she was tired of other things. she tried this morning an air or
 two upon the piano, sang a simple song in a sweet but slightly metallic
 voice, and then seating herself by the open window, read philip’s letter.
 was she thinking about philip, as she gazed across the fresh lawn over the
 tree tops to the chelton hills, or of that world which his entrance, into
 her tradition-bound life had been one of the means of opening to her?
 whatever she thought, she was not idly musing, as one might see by the
 expression of her face. after a time she took up a book; it was a medical
 work, and to all appearance about as interesting to a girl of eighteen as
 the statutes at large; but her face was soon aglow over its pages, and she
 was so absorbed in it that she did not notice the entrance of her mother
 at the open door.
 “ruth?”
 “well, mother,” said the young student, looking up, with a shade of
 impatience.
 “i wanted to talk with thee a little about thy plans.”
 “mother; thee knows i couldn’t stand it at westfield; the school stifled
 me, it’s a place to turn young people into dried fruit.”
 “i know,” said margaret bolton, with a half anxious smile, “thee chafes
 against all the ways of friends, but what will thee do? why is thee so
 discontented?”
 “if i must say it, mother, i want to go away, and get out of this dead
 level.”
 with a look half of pain and half of pity, her mother answered, “i am sure
 thee is little interfered with; thee dresses as thee will, and goes where
 thee pleases, to any church thee likes, and thee has music. i had a visit
 yesterday from the society’s committee by way of discipline, because we
 have a piano in the house, which is against the rules.”
 “i hope thee told the elders that father and i are responsible for the
 piano, and that, much as thee loves music, thee is never in the room when
 it is played. fortunately father is already out of meeting, so they can’t
 discipline him. i heard father tell cousin abner that he was whipped so
 often for whistling when he was a boy that he was determined to have what
 compensation he could get now.”
 “thy ways greatly try me, ruth, and all thy relations. i desire thy
 happiness first of all, but thee is starting out on a dangerous path. is
 thy father willing thee should go away to a school of the world’s people?”
 “i have not asked him,” ruth replied with a look that might imply that she
 was one of those determined little bodies who first made up her own mind
 and then compelled others to make up theirs in accordance with hers.
 “and when thee has got the education thee wants, and lost all relish for
 the society of thy friends and the ways of thy ancestors, what then?”
 ruth turned square round to her mother, and with an impassive face and not
 the slightest change of tone, said,
 “mother, i’m going to study medicine?”
 margaret bolton almost lost for a moment her habitual placidity.
 “thee, study medicine! a slight frail girl like thee, study medicine! does
 thee think thee could stand it six months? and the lectures, and the
 dissecting rooms, has thee thought of the dissecting rooms?”
 “mother,” said ruth calmly, “i have thought it all over. i know i can go
 through the whole, clinics, dissecting room and all. does thee think i
 lack nerve? what is there to fear in a person dead more than in a person
 living?”
 “but thy health and strength, child; thee can never stand the severe
 application. and, besides, suppose thee does learn medicine?”
 “i will practice it.”
 “here?”
 “here.”
 “where thee and thy family are known?”
 “if i can get patients.”
 “i hope at least, ruth, thee will let us know when thee opens an office,”
 said her mother, with an approach to sarcasm that she rarely indulged in,
 as she rose and left the room.
 ruth sat quite still for a time, with face intent and flushed. it was out
 now. she had begun her open battle.
 the sight-seers returned in high spirits from the city. was there any
 building in greece to compare with girard college, was there ever such a
 magnificent pile of stone devised for the shelter of poor orphans? think
 of the stone shingles of the roof eight inches thick! ruth asked the
 enthusiasts if they would like to live in such a sounding mausoleum, with
 its great halls and echoing rooms, and no comfortable place in it for the
 accommodation of any body? if they were orphans, would they like to be
 brought up in a grecian temple?
 and then there was broad street! wasn’t it the broadest and the longest
 street in the world? there certainly was no end to it, and even ruth was
 philadelphian enough to believe that a street ought not to have any end,
 or architectural point upon which the weary eye could rest.
 but neither st. girard, nor broad street, neither wonders of the mint nor
 the glories of the hall where the ghosts of our fathers sit always signing
 the declaration; impressed the visitors so much as the splendors of the
 chestnut street windows, and the bargains on eighth street. the truth is
 that the country cousins had come to town to attend the yearly meeting,
 and the amount of shopping that preceded that religious event was scarcely
 exceeded by the preparations for the opera in more worldly circles.
 “is thee going to the yearly meeting, ruth?” asked one of the girls.
 “i have nothing to wear,” replied that demure person. “if thee wants to
 see new bonnets, orthodox to a shade and conformed to the letter of the
 true form, thee must go to the arch street meeting. any departure from
 either color or shape would be instantly taken note of. it has occupied
 mother a long time, to find at the shops the exact shade for her new
 bonnet. oh, thee must go by all means. but thee won’t see there a sweeter
 woman than mother.”
 “and thee won’t go?”
 “why should i? i’ve been again and again. if i go to meeting at all i like
 best to sit in the quiet old house in germantown, where the windows are
 all open and i can see the trees, and hear the stir of the leaves. it’s
 such a crush at the yearly meeting at arch street, and then there’s the
 row of sleek-looking young men who line the curbstone and stare at us as
 we come out. no, i don’t feel at home there.”
 that evening ruth and her father sat late by the drawing-room fire, as
 they were quite apt to do at night. it was always a time of confidences.
 “thee has another letter from young sterling,” said eli bolton.
 “yes. philip has gone to the far west.”
 “how far?”
 “he doesn’t say, but it’s on the frontier, and on the map everything
 beyond it is marked ‘indians’ and ‘desert,’ and looks as desolate as a
 wednesday meeting.”
 “humph. it was time for him to do something. is he going to start a daily
 newspaper among the kick-a-poos?”
 “father, thee’s unjust to philip. he’s going into business.”
 “what sort of business can a young man go into without capital?”
 “he doesn’t say exactly what it is,” said ruth a little dubiously, “but
 it’s something about land and railroads, and thee knows, father, that
 fortunes are made nobody knows exactly how, in a new country.”
 “i should think so, you innocent puss, and in an old one too. but philip
 is honest, and he has talent enough, if he will stop scribbling, to make
 his way. but thee may as well take care of theeself, ruth, and not go
 dawdling along with a young man in his adventures, until thy own mind is a
 little more settled what thee wants.”
 this excellent advice did not seem to impress ruth greatly, for she was
 looking away with that abstraction of vision which often came into her
 grey eyes, and at length she exclaimed, with a sort of impatience,
 “i wish i could go west, or south, or somewhere. what a box women are put
 into, measured for it, and put in young; if we go anywhere it’s in a box,
 veiled and pinioned and shut in by disabilities. father, i should like to
 break things and get loose!”
 what a sweet-voiced little innocent, it was to be sure.
 “thee will no doubt break things enough when thy time comes, child; women
 always have; but what does thee want now that thee hasn’t?”
 “i want to be something, to make myself something, to do something. why
 should i rust, and be stupid, and sit in inaction because i am a girl?
 what would happen to me if thee should lose thy property and die? what one
 useful thing could i do for a living, for the support of mother and the
 children? and if i had a fortune, would thee want me to lead a useless
 life?”
 “has thy mother led a useless life?”
 “somewhat that depends upon whether her children amount to anything,”
 retorted the sharp little disputant. “what’s the good, father, of a series
 of human beings who don’t advance any?”
 friend eli, who had long ago laid aside the quaker dress, and was out of
 meeting, and who in fact after a youth of doubt could not yet define his
 belief, nevertheless looked with some wonder at this fierce young eagle of
 his, hatched in a friend’s dove-cote. but he only said,
 “has thee consulted thy mother about a career, i suppose it is a career
 thee wants?”
 ruth did not reply directly; she complained that her mother didn’t
 understand her. but that wise and placid woman understood the sweet rebel
 a great deal better than ruth understood herself. she also had a history,
 possibly, and had sometime beaten her young wings against the cage of
 custom, and indulged in dreams of a new social order, and had passed
 through that fiery period when it seems possible for one mind, which has
 not yet tried its limits, to break up and re-arrange the world.
 ruth replied to philip’s letter in due time and in the most cordial and
 unsentimental manner. philip liked the letter, as he did everything she
 did; but he had a dim notion that there was more about herself in the
 letter than about him. he took it with him from the southern hotel, when
 he went to walk, and read it over and again in an unfrequented street as
 he stumbled along. the rather common-place and unformed hand-writing
 seemed to him peculiar and characteristic, different from that of any
 other woman.
 ruth was glad to hear that philip had made a push into the world, and she
 was sure that his talent and courage would make a way for him. she should
 pray for his success at any rate, and especially that the indians, in st.
 louis, would not take his scalp.
 philip looked rather dubious at this sentence, and wished that he had
 written nothing about indians.
 eli bolton and his wife talked over ruth’s case, as they had often done
 before, with no little anxiety. alone of all their children she was
 impatient of the restraints and monotony of the friends’ society, and
 wholly indisposed to accept the “inner light” as a guide into a life of
 acceptance and inaction. when margaret told her husband of ruth’s newest
 project, he did not exhibit so much surprise as she hoped for. in fact he
 said that he did not see why a woman should not enter the medical
 profession if she felt a call to it.
 “but,” said margaret, “consider her total inexperience of the world, and
 her frail health. can such a slight little body endure the ordeal of the
 preparation for, or the strain of, the practice of the profession?”
 “did thee ever think, margaret, whether, she can endure being thwarted in
 an object on which she has so set her heart, as she has on this? thee has
 trained her thyself at home, in her enfeebled childhood, and thee knows
 how strong her will is, and what she has been able to accomplish in
 self-culture by the simple force of her determination. she never will be
 satisfied until she has tried her own strength.”
 “i wish,” said margaret, with an inconsequence that is not exclusively
 feminine, “that she were in the way to fall in love and marry by and by. i
 think that would cure her of some of her notions. i am not sure but if she
 went away, to some distant school, into an entirely new life, her thoughts
 would be diverted.”
 eli bolton almost laughed as he regarded his wife, with eyes that never
 looked at her except fondly, and replied,
 “perhaps thee remembers that thee had notions also, before we were
 married, and before thee became a member of meeting. i think ruth comes
 honestly by certain tendencies which thee has hidden under the friend’s
 dress.”
 margaret could not say no to this, and while she paused, it was evident
 that memory was busy with suggestions to shake her present opinions.
 “why not let ruth try the study for a time,” suggested eli; “there is a
 fair beginning of a woman’s medical college in the city. quite likely she
 will soon find that she needs first a more general culture, and fall in
 with thy wish that she should see more of the world at some large school.”
 there really seemed to be nothing else to be done, and margaret consented
 at length without approving. and it was agreed that ruth, in order to
 spare her fatigue, should take lodgings with friends near the college and
 make a trial in the pursuit of that science to which we all owe our lives,
 and sometimes as by a miracle of escape.
 that day mr. bolton brought home a stranger to dinner, mr. bigler of the
 great firm of pennybacker, bigler & small, railroad contractors. he
 was always bringing home somebody, who had a scheme; to build a road, or
 open a mine, or plant a swamp with cane to grow paper-stock, or found a
 hospital, or invest in a patent shad-bone separator, or start a college
 somewhere on the frontier, contiguous to a land speculation.
 the bolton house was a sort of hotel for this kind of people. they were
 always coming. ruth had known them from childhood, and she used to say
 that her father attracted them as naturally as a sugar hogshead does
 flies. ruth had an idea that a large portion of the world lived by getting
 the rest of the world into schemes. mr. bolton never could say “no” to any
 of them, not even, said ruth again, to the society for stamping oyster
 shells with scripture texts before they were sold at retail.
 mr. bigler’s plan this time, about which he talked loudly, with his mouth
 full, all dinner time, was the building of the tunkhannock, rattlesnake
 and youngwomans town railroad, which would not only be a great highway to
 the west, but would open to market inexhaustible coal-fields and untold
 millions of lumber. the plan of operations was very simple.
 “we’ll buy the lands,” explained he, “on long time, backed by the notes of
 good men; and then mortgage them for money enough to get the road well on.
 then get the towns on the line to issue their bonds for stock, and sell
 their bonds for enough to complete the road, and partly stock it,
 especially if we mortgage each section as we complete it. we can then sell
 the rest of the stock on the prospect of the business of the road through
 an improved country, and also sell the lands at a big advance, on the
 strength of the road. all we want,” continued mr. bigler in his frank
 manner, “is a few thousand dollars to start the surveys, and arrange
 things in the legislature. there is some parties will have to be seen, who
 might make us trouble.”
 “it will take a good deal of money to start the enterprise,” remarked mr.
 bolton, who knew very well what “seeing” a pennsylvania legislature meant,
 but was too polite to tell mr. bigler what he thought of him, while he was
 his guest; “what security would one have for it?”
 mr. bigler smiled a hard kind of smile, and said, “you’d be inside, mr.
 bolton, and you’d have the first chance in the deal.”
 this was rather unintelligible to ruth, who was nevertheless somewhat
 amused by the study of a type of character she had seen before. at length
 she interrupted the conversation by asking,
 “you’d sell the stock, i suppose, mr. bigler, to anybody who was attracted
 by the prospectus?”
 “o, certainly, serve all alike,” said mr. bigler, now noticing ruth for
 the first time, and a little puzzled by the serene, intelligent face that
 was turned towards him.
 “well, what would become of the poor people who had been led to put their
 little money into the speculation, when you got out of it and left it half
 way?”
 it would be no more true to say of mr. bigler that he was or could be
 embarrassed, than to say that a brass counterfeit dollar-piece would
 change color when refused; the question annoyed him a little, in mr.
 bolton’s presence.
 “why, yes, miss, of course, in a great enterprise for the benefit of the
 community there will little things occur, which, which—and, of
 course, the poor ought to be looked to; i tell my wife, that the poor must
 be looked to; if you can tell who are poor—there’s so many
 impostors. and then, there’s so many poor in the legislature to be looked
 after,” said the contractor with a sort of a chuckle, “isn’t that so, mr.
 bolton?”
 eli bolton replied that he never had much to do with the legislature.
 “yes,” continued this public benefactor, “an uncommon poor lot this year,
 uncommon. consequently an expensive lot. the fact is, mr. bolton, that the
 price is raised so high on united states senator now, that it affects the
 whole market; you can’t get any public improvement through on reasonable
 terms. simony is what i call it, simony,” repeated mr. bigler, as if he
 had said a good thing.
 mr. bigler went on and gave some very interesting details of the intimate
 connection between railroads and politics, and thoroughly entertained
 himself all dinner time, and as much disgusted ruth, who asked no more
 questions, and her father who replied in monosyllables:
 “i wish,” said ruth to her father, after the guest had gone, “that you
 wouldn’t bring home any more such horrid men. do all men who wear big
 diamond breast-pins, flourish their knives at table, and use bad grammar,
 and cheat?”
 “o, child, thee mustn’t be too observing. mr. bigler is one of the most
 important men in the state; nobody has more influence at harrisburg. i
 don’t like him any more than thee does, but i’d better lend him a little
 money than to have his ill will.”
 “father, i think thee’d better have his ill-will than his company. is it
 true that he gave money to help build the pretty little church of st.
 james the less, and that he is, one of the vestrymen?”
 “yes. he is not such a bad fellow. one of the men in third street asked
 him the other day, whether his was a high church or a low church? bigler
 said he didn’t know; he’d been in it once, and he could touch the ceiling
 in the side aisle with his hand.”
 “i think he’s just horrid,” was ruth’s final summary of him, after the
 manner of the swift judgment of women, with no consideration of the
 extenuating circumstances. mr. bigler had no idea that he had not made a
 good impression on the whole family; he certainly intended to be
 agreeable. margaret agreed with her daughter, and though she never said
 anything to such people, she was grateful to ruth for sticking at least
 one pin into him.
 such was the serenity of the bolton household that a stranger in it would
 never have suspected there was any opposition to ruth’s going to the
 medical school. and she went quietly to take her residence in town, and
 began her attendance of the lectures, as if it were the most natural thing
 in the world. she did not heed, if she heard, the busy and wondering
 gossip of relations and acquaintances, gossip that has no less currency
 among the friends than elsewhere because it is whispered slyly and creeps
 about in an undertone.
 ruth was absorbed, and for the first time in her life thoroughly happy;
 happy in the freedom of her life, and in the keen enjoyment of the
 investigation that broadened its field day by day. she was in high spirits
 when she came home to spend first days; the house was full of her gaiety
 and her merry laugh, and the children wished that ruth would never go away
 again. but her mother noticed, with a little anxiety, the sometimes
 flushed face, and the sign of an eager spirit in the kindling eyes, and,
 as well, the serious air of determination and endurance in her face at
 unguarded moments.
 the college was a small one and it sustained itself not without difficulty
 in this city, which is so conservative, and is yet the origin of so many
 radical movements. there were not more than a dozen attendants on the
 lectures all together, so that the enterprise had the air of an
 experiment, and the fascination of pioneering for those engaged in it.
 there was one woman physician driving about town in her carriage,
 attacking the most violent diseases in all quarters with persistent
 courage, like a modern bellona in her war chariot, who was popularly
 supposed to gather in fees to the amount ten to twenty thousand dollars a
 year. perhaps some of these students looked forward to the near day when
 they would support such a practice and a husband besides, but it is
 unknown that any of them ever went further than practice in hospitals and
 in their own nurseries, and it is feared that some of them were quite as
 ready as their sisters, in emergencies, to “call a man.”
 if ruth had any exaggerated expectations of a professional life, she kept
 them to herself, and was known to her fellows of the class simply as a
 cheerful, sincere student, eager in her investigations, and never
 impatient at anything, except an insinuation that women had not as much
 mental capacity for science as men.
 “they really say,” said one young quaker sprig to another youth of his
 age, “that ruth bolton is really going to be a saw-bones, attends
 lectures, cuts up bodies, and all that. she’s cool enough for a surgeon,
 anyway.” he spoke feelingly, for he had very likely been weighed in ruth’s
 calm eyes sometime, and thoroughly scared by the little laugh that
 accompanied a puzzling reply to one of his conversational nothings. such
 young gentlemen, at this time, did not come very distinctly into ruth’s
 horizon, except as amusing circumstances.
 about the details of her student life, ruth said very little to her
 friends, but they had reason to know, afterwards, that it required all her
 nerve and the almost complete exhaustion of her physical strength, to
 carry her through. she began her anatomical practice upon detached
 portions of the human frame, which were brought into the demonstrating
 room—dissecting the eye, the ear, and a small tangle of muscles and
 nerves—an occupation which had not much more savor of death in it
 than the analysis of a portion of a plant out of which the life went when
 it was plucked up by the roots. custom inures the most sensitive persons
 to that which is at first most repellant; and in the late war we saw the
 most delicate women, who could not at home endure the sight of blood,
 become so used to scenes of carnage, that they walked the hospitals and
 the margins of battle-fields, amid the poor remnants of torn humanity,
 with as perfect self-possession as if they were strolling in a flower
 garden.
 it happened that ruth was one evening deep in a line of investigation
 which she could not finish or understand without demonstration, and so
 eager was she in it, that it seemed as if she could not wait till the next
 day. she, therefore, persuaded a fellow student, who was reading that
 evening with her, to go down to the dissecting room of the college, and
 ascertain what they wanted to know by an hour’s work there. perhaps, also,
 ruth wanted to test her own nerve, and to see whether the power of
 association was stronger in her mind than her own will.
 the janitor of the shabby and comfortless old building admitted the girls,
 not without suspicion, and gave them lighted candles, which they would
 need, without other remark than “there’s a new one, miss,” as the girls
 went up the broad stairs.
 they climbed to the third story, and paused before a door, which they
 unlocked, and which admitted them into a long apartment, with a row of
 windows on one side and one at the end. the room was without light, save
 from the stars and the candles the girls carried, which revealed to them
 dimly two long and several small tables, a few benches and chairs, a
 couple of skeletons hanging on the wall, a sink, and cloth-covered heaps
 of something upon the tables here and there.
 the windows were open, and the cool night wind came in strong enough to
 flutter a white covering now and then, and to shake the loose casements.
 but all the sweet odors of the night could not take from the room a faint
 suggestion of mortality.
 the young ladies paused a moment. the room itself was familiar enough, but
 night makes almost any chamber eerie, and especially such a room of
 detention as this where the mortal parts of the unburied might—almost
 be supposed to be, visited, on the sighing night winds, by the wandering
 spirits of their late tenants.
 opposite and at some distance across the roofs of lower buildings, the
 girls saw a tall edifice, the long upper story of which seemed to be a
 dancing hall. the windows of that were also open, and through them they
 heard the scream of the jiggered and tortured violin, and the pump, pump
 of the oboe, and saw the moving shapes of men and women in quick
 transition, and heard the prompter’s drawl.
 “i wonder,” said ruth, “what the girls dancing there would think if they
 saw us, or knew that there was such a room as this so near them.”
 she did not speak very loud, and, perhaps unconsciously, the girls drew
 near to each other as they approached the long table in the centre of the
 room. a straight object lay upon it, covered with a sheet. this was
 doubtless “the new one” of which the janitor spoke. ruth advanced, and
 with a not very steady hand lifted the white covering from the upper part
 of the figure and turned it down. both the girls started. it was a negro.
 the black face seemed to defy the pallor of death, and asserted an ugly
 life-likeness that was frightful.
 ruth was as pale as the white sheet, and her comrade whispered, “come
 away, ruth, it is awful.”
 perhaps it was the wavering light of the candles, perhaps it was only the
 agony from a death of pain, but the repulsive black face seemed to wear a
 scowl that said, “haven’t you yet done with the outcast, persecuted black
 man, but you must now haul him from his grave, and send even your women to
 dismember his body?”
 who is this dead man, one of thousands who died yesterday, and will be
 dust anon, to protest that science shall not turn his worthless carcass to
 some account?
 ruth could have had no such thought, for with a pity in her sweet face,
 that for the moment overcame fear and disgust, she reverently replaced the
 covering, and went away to her own table, as her companion did to hers.
 and there for an hour they worked at their several problems, without
 speaking, but not without an awe of the presence there, “the new one,” and
 not without an awful sense of life itself, as they heard the pulsations of
 the music and the light laughter from the dancing-hall.
 when, at length, they went away, and locked the dreadful room behind them,
 and came out into the street, where people were passing, they, for the
 first time, realized, in the relief they felt, what a nervous strain they
 had been under.
 while ruth was thus absorbed in her new occupation, and the spring was
 wearing away, philip and his friends were still detained at the southern
 hotel. the great contractors had concluded their business with the state
 and railroad officials and with the lesser contractors, and departed for
 the east. but the serious illness of one of the engineers kept philip and
 henry in the city and occupied in alternate watchings.
 philip wrote to ruth of the new acquaintance they had made, col. sellers,
 an enthusiastic and hospitable gentleman, very much interested in the
 development of the country, and in their success. they had not had an
 opportunity to visit at his place “up in the country” yet, but the colonel
 often dined with them, and in confidence, confided to them his projects,
 and seemed to take a great liking to them, especially to his friend harry.
 it was true that he never seemed to have ready money, but he was engaged
 in very large operations.
 the correspondence was not very brisk between these two young persons, so
 differently occupied; for though philip wrote long letters, he got brief
 ones in reply, full of sharp little observations however, such as one
 concerning col. sellers, namely, that such men dined at their house every
 week.
 ruth’s proposed occupation astonished philip immensely, but while he
 argued it and discussed it, he did not dare hint to her his fear that it
 would interfere with his most cherished plans. he too sincerely respected
 ruth’s judgment to make any protest, however, and he would have defended
 her course against the world.
 this enforced waiting at st. louis was very irksome to philip. his money
 was running away, for one thing, and he longed to get into the field, and
 see for himself what chance there was for a fortune or even an occupation.
 the contractors had given the young men leave to join the engineer corps
 as soon as they could, but otherwise had made no provision for them, and
 in fact had left them with only the most indefinite expectations of
 something large in the future.
 harry was entirely happy; in his circumstances. he very soon knew
 everybody, from the governor of the state down to the waiters at the
 hotel. he had the wall street slang at his tongue’s end; he always talked
 like a capitalist, and entered with enthusiasm into all the land and
 railway schemes with which the air was thick.
 col. sellers and harry talked together by the hour and by the day. harry
 informed his new friend that he was going out with the engineer corps of
 the salt lick pacific extension, but that wasn’t his real business.
 “i’m to have, with another party,” said harry, “a big contract in the
 road, as soon as it is let; and, meantime, i’m with the engineers to spy
 out the best land and the depot sites.”
 “it’s everything,” suggested the colonel, “in knowing where to invest.
 i’ve known people throwaway their money because they were too
 consequential to take sellers’ advice. others, again, have made their pile
 on taking it. i’ve looked over the ground; i’ve been studying it for
 twenty years. you can’t put your finger on a spot in the map of missouri
 that i don’t know as if i’d made it. when you want to place anything,”
 continued the colonel, confidently, “just let beriah sellers know. that’s
 all.”
 “oh, i haven’t got much in ready money i can lay my hands on now, but if a
 fellow could do anything with fifteen or twenty thousand dollars, as a
 beginning, i shall draw for that when i see the right opening.”
 “well, that’s something, that’s something, fifteen or twenty thousand
 dollars, say twenty—as an advance,” said the colonel reflectively,
 as if turning over his mind for a project that could be entered on with
 such a trifling sum.
 “i’ll tell you what it is—but only to you mr. brierly, only to you,
 mind; i’ve got a little project that i’ve been keeping. it looks small,
 looks small on paper, but it’s got a big future. what should you say, sir,
 to a city, built up like the rod of aladdin had touched it, built up in
 two years, where now you wouldn’t expect it any more than you’d expect a
 light-house on the top of pilot knob? and you could own the land! it can
 be done, sir. it can be done!”
 the colonel hitched up his chair close to harry, laid his hand on his
 knee, and, first looking about him, said in a low voice, “the salt lick
 pacific extension is going to run through stone’s landing! the almighty
 never laid out a cleaner piece of level prairie for a city; and it’s the
 natural center of all that region of hemp and tobacco.”
 “what makes you think the road will go there? it’s twenty miles, on the
 map, off the straight line of the road?”
 “you can’t tell what is the straight line till the engineers have been
 over it. between us, i have talked with jeff thompson, the division
 engineer. he understands the wants of stone’s landing, and the claims of
 the inhabitants—who are to be there. jeff says that a railroad is
 for—the accommodation of the people and not for the benefit of
 gophers; and if, he don’t run this to stone’s landing he’ll be damned! you
 ought to know jeff; he’s one of the most enthusiastic engineers in this
 western country, and one of the best fellows that ever looked through the
 bottom of a glass.”
 the recommendation was not undeserved. there was nothing that jeff
 wouldn’t do, to accommodate a friend, from sharing his last dollar with
 him, to winging him in a duel. when he understood from col. sellers. how
 the land lay at stone’s landing, he cordially shook hands with that
 gentleman, asked him to drink, and fairly roared out, “why, god bless my
 soul, colonel, a word from one virginia gentleman to another is ’nuff
 ced.’ there’s stone’s landing been waiting for a railroad more than four
 thousand years, and damme if she shan’t have it.”
 philip had not so much faith as harry in stone’s landing, when the latter
 opened the project to him, but harry talked about it as if he already
 owned that incipient city.
 harry thoroughly believed in all his projects and inventions, and lived
 day by day in their golden atmosphere. everybody liked the young fellow,
 for how could they help liking one of such engaging manners and large
 fortune? the waiters at the hotel would do more for him than for any other
 guest, and he made a great many acquaintances among the people of st.
 louis, who liked his sensible and liberal views about the development of
 the western country, and about st. louis. he said it ought to be the
 national capital. harry made partial arrangements with several of the
 merchants for furnishing supplies for his contract on the salt lick
 pacific extension; consulted the maps with the engineers, and went over
 the profiles with the contractors, figuring out estimates for bids. he was
 exceedingly busy with those things when he was not at the bedside of his
 sick acquaintance, or arranging the details of his speculation with col.
 sellers.
 meantime the days went along and the weeks, and the money in harry’s
 pocket got lower and lower. he was just as liberal with what he had as
 before, indeed it was his nature to be free with his money or with that of
 others, and he could lend or spend a dollar with an air that made it seem
 like ten. at length, at the end of one week, when his hotel bill was
 presented, harry found not a cent in his pocket to meet it. he carelessly
 remarked to the landlord that he was not that day in funds, but he would
 draw on new york, and he sat down and wrote to the contractors in that
 city a glowing letter about the prospects of the road, and asked them to
 advance a hundred or two, until he got at work. no reply came. he wrote
 again, in an unoffended business like tone, suggesting that he had better
 draw at three days. a short answer came to this, simply saying that money
 was very tight in wall street just then, and that he had better join the
 engineer corps as soon as he could.
 but the bill had to be paid, and harry took it to philip, and asked him if
 he thought he hadn’t better draw on his uncle. philip had not much faith
 in harry’s power of “drawing,” and told him that he would pay the bill
 himself. whereupon harry dismissed the matter then and thereafter from his
 thoughts, and, like a light-hearted good fellow as he was, gave himself no
 more trouble about his board-bills. philip paid them, swollen as they were
 with a monstrous list of extras; but he seriously counted the diminishing
 bulk of his own hoard, which was all the money he had in the world. had he
 not tacitly agreed to share with harry to the last in this adventure, and
 would not the generous fellow divide with him if he, philip, were in want
 and harry had anything?
 the fever at length got tired of tormenting the stout young engineer, who
 lay sick at the hotel, and left him, very thin, a little sallow but an
 “acclimated” man. everybody said he was “acclimated” now, and said it
 cheerfully. what it is to be acclimated to western fevers no two persons
 exactly agree.
 some say it is a sort of vaccination that renders death by some malignant
 type of fever less probable. some regard it as a sort of initiation, like
 that into the odd fellows, which renders one liable to his regular dues
 thereafter. others consider it merely the acquisition of a habit of taking
 every morning before breakfast a dose of bitters, composed of whiskey and
 assafoetida, out of the acclimation jug.
 jeff thompson afterwards told philip that he once asked senator atchison,
 then acting vice-president of the united states, about the possibility of
 acclimation; he thought the opinion of the second officer of our great
 government would be valuable on this point. they were sitting together on
 a bench before a country tavern, in the free converse permitted by our
 democratic habits.
 “i suppose, senator, that you have become acclimated to this country?”
 “well,” said the vice-president, crossing his legs, pulling his wide-awake
 down over his forehead, causing a passing chicken to hop quickly one side
 by the accuracy of his aim, and speaking with senatorial deliberation, “i
 think i have. i’ve been here twenty-five years, and dash, dash my dash to
 dash, if i haven’t entertained twenty-five separate and distinct
 earthquakes, one a year. the niggro is the only person who can stand the
 fever and ague of this region.”
 the convalescence of the engineer was the signal for breaking up quarters
 at st. louis, and the young fortune-hunters started up the river in good
 spirits. it was only the second time either of them had been upon a
 mississippi steamboat, and nearly everything they saw had the charm of
 novelty. col. sellers was at the landing to bid them good-bye.
 “i shall send you up that basket of champagne by the next boat; no, no; no
 thanks; you’ll find it not bad in camp,” he cried out as the plank was
 hauled in. “my respects to thompson. tell him to sight for stone’s. let me
 know, mr. brierly, when you are ready to locate; i’ll come over from
 hawkeye. goodbye.”
 and the last the young fellows saw of the colonel, he was waving his hat,
 and beaming prosperity and good luck.
 the voyage was delightful, and was not long enough to become monotonous.
 the travelers scarcely had time indeed to get accustomed to the splendors
 of the great saloon where the tables were spread for meals, a marvel of
 paint and gilding, its ceiling hung with fancifully cut tissue-paper of
 many colors, festooned and arranged in endless patterns. the whole was
 more beautiful than a barber’s shop. the printed bill of fare at dinner
 was longer and more varied, the proprietors justly boasted, than that of
 any hotel in new york. it must have been the work of an author of talent
 and imagination, and it surely was not his fault if the dinner itself was
 to a certain extent a delusion, and if the guests got something that
 tasted pretty much the same whatever dish they ordered; nor was it his
 fault if a general flavor of rose in all the dessert dishes suggested that
 they had passed through the barber’s saloon on their way from the kitchen.
 the travelers landed at a little settlement on the left bank, and at once
 took horses for the camp in the interior, carrying their clothes and
 blankets strapped behind the saddles. harry was dressed as we have seen
 him once before, and his long and shining boots attracted not a little the
 attention of the few persons they met on the road, and especially of the
 bright faced wenches who lightly stepped along the highway, picturesque in
 their colored kerchiefs, carrying light baskets, or riding upon mules and
 balancing before them a heavier load.
 harry sang fragments of operas and talked about their fortune. philip even
 was excited by the sense of freedom and adventure, and the beauty of the
 landscape. the prairie, with its new grass and unending acres of brilliant
 flowers—chiefly the innumerable varieties of phlox—bore the
 look of years of cultivation, and the occasional open groves of white oaks
 gave it a park-like appearance. it was hardly unreasonable to expect to
 see at any moment, the gables and square windows of an elizabethan mansion
 in one of the well kept groves.
 towards sunset of the third day, when the young gentlemen thought they
 ought to be near the town of magnolia, near which they had been directed
 to find the engineers’ camp, they descried a log house and drew up before
 it to enquire the way. half the building was store, and half was dwelling
 house. at the door of the latter stood a negress with a bright turban on
 her head, to whom philip called,
 “can you tell me, auntie, how far it is to the town of magnolia?”
 “why, bress you chile,” laughed the woman, “you’s dere now.”
 it was true. this log house was the compactly built town, and all creation
 was its suburbs. the engineers’ camp was only two or three miles distant.
 “you’s boun’ to find it,” directed auntie, “if you don’t keah nuffin ’bout
 de road, and go fo’ de sun-down.”
 a brisk gallop brought the riders in sight of the twinkling light of the
 camp, just as the stars came out. it lay in a little hollow, where a small
 stream ran through a sparse grove of young white oaks. a half dozen tents
 were pitched under the trees, horses and oxen were corraled at a little
 distance, and a group of men sat on camp stools or lay on blankets about a
 bright fire. the twang of a banjo became audible as they drew nearer, and
 they saw a couple of negroes, from some neighboring plantation, “breaking
 down” a juba in approved style, amid the “hi, hi’s” of the spectators.
 mr. jeff thompson, for it was the camp of this redoubtable engineer, gave
 the travelers a hearty welcome, offered them ground room in his own tent,
 ordered supper, and set out a small jug, a drop from which he declared
 necessary on account of the chill of the evening.
 “i never saw an eastern man,” said jeff, “who knew how to drink from a jug
 with one hand. it’s as easy as lying. so.” he grasped the handle with the
 right hand, threw the jug back upon his arm, and applied his lips to the
 nozzle. it was an act as graceful as it was simple. “besides,” said mr.
 thompson, setting it down, “it puts every man on his honor as to
 quantity.”
 early to turn in was the rule of the camp, and by nine o’clock everybody
 was under his blanket, except jeff himself, who worked awhile at his table
 over his field-book, and then arose, stepped outside the tent door and
 sang, in a strong and not unmelodious tenor, the star spangled banner from
 beginning to end. it proved to be his nightly practice to let off the
 unexpended steam of his conversational powers, in the words of this
 stirring song.
 it was a long time before philip got to sleep. he saw the fire light, he
 saw the clear stars through the tree-tops, he heard the gurgle of the
 stream, the stamp of the horses, the occasional barking of the dog which
 followed the cook’s wagon, the hooting of an owl; and when these failed he
 saw jeff, standing on a battlement, mid the rocket’s red glare, and heard
 him sing, “oh, say, can you see?” it was the first time he had ever slept
 on the ground.
 ——“we have view’d it, and measur’d it within all,
 by the scale the richest tract of land, love, in the kingdom!
 there will be made seventeen or eighteeen millions, or more, as’t
 may be handled!” the
 devil is an ass.
 nobody dressed more like an engineer than mr. henry brierly. the
 completeness of his appointments was the envy of the corps, and the gay
 fellow himself was the admiration of the camp servants, axemen, teamsters
 and cooks.
 “i reckon you didn’t git them boots no wher’s this side o’ sent louis?”
 queried the tall missouri youth who acted as commissary’s assistant.
 “no, new york.”
 “yas, i’ve heern o’ new york,” continued the butternut lad, attentively
 studying each item of harry’s dress, and endeavoring to cover his design
 with interesting conversation. “’n there’s massachusetts.”,
 “it’s not far off.”
 “i’ve heern massachusetts was a——-of a place. les, see, what
 state’s massachusetts in?”
 “massachusetts,” kindly replied harry, “is in the state of boston.”
 “abolish’n wan’t it? they must a cost right smart,” referring to the
 boots.
 harry shouldered his rod and went to the field, tramped over the prairie
 by day, and figured up results at night, with the utmost cheerfulness and
 industry, and plotted the line on the profile paper, without, however, the
 least idea of engineering practical or theoretical. perhaps there was not
 a great deal of scientific knowledge in the entire corps, nor was very
 much needed. they were making, what is called a preliminary survey, and
 the chief object of a preliminary survey was to get up an excitement about
 the road, to interest every town in that part of the state in it, under
 the belief that the road would run through it, and to get the aid of every
 planter upon the prospect that a station would be on his land.
 mr. jeff thompson was the most popular engineer who could be found for
 this work. he did not bother himself much about details or
 practicabilities of location, but ran merrily along, sighting from the top
 of one divide to the top of another, and striking “plumb” every town site
 and big plantation within twenty or thirty miles of his route. in his own
 language he “just went booming.”
 this course gave harry an opportunity, as he said, to learn the practical
 details of engineering, and it gave philip a chance to see the country,
 and to judge for himself what prospect of a fortune it offered. both he
 and harry got the “refusal” of more than one plantation as they went
 along, and wrote urgent letters to their eastern correspondents, upon the
 beauty of the land and the certainty that it would quadruple in value as
 soon as the road was finally located. it seemed strange to them that
 capitalists did not flock out there and secure this land.
 they had not been in the field over two weeks when harry wrote to his
 friend col. sellers that he’d better be on the move, for the line was
 certain to go to stone’s landing. any one who looked at the line on the
 map, as it was laid down from day to day, would have been uncertain which
 way it was going; but jeff had declared that in his judgment the only
 practicable route from the point they then stood on was to follow the
 divide to stone’s landing, and it was generally understood that that town
 would be the next one hit.
 “we’ll make it, boys,” said the chief, “if we have to go in a balloon.”
 and make it they did. in less than a week, this indomitable engineer had
 carried his moving caravan over slues and branches, across bottoms and
 along divides, and pitched his tents in the very heart of the city of
 stone’s landing.
 “well, i’ll be dashed,” was heard the cheery voice of mr. thompson, as he
 stepped outside the tent door at sunrise next morning. “if this don’t get
 me. i say, yon grayson, get out your sighting iron and see if you can find
 old sellers’ town. blame me if we wouldn’t have run plumb by it if
 twilight had held on a little longer. oh! sterling, brierly, get up and
 see the city. there’s a steamboat just coming round the bend.” and jeff
 roared with laughter. “the mayor’ll be round here to breakfast.”
 the fellows turned out of the tents, rubbing their eyes, and stared about
 them. they were camped on the second bench of the narrow bottom of a
 crooked, sluggish stream, that was some five rods wide in the present good
 stage of water. before them were a dozen log cabins, with stick and mud
 chimneys, irregularly disposed on either side of a not very well defined
 road, which did not seem to know its own mind exactly, and, after
 straggling through the town, wandered off over the rolling prairie in an
 uncertain way, as if it had started for nowhere and was quite likely to
 reach its destination. just as it left the town, however, it was cheered
 and assisted by a guide-board, upon which was the legend “ mils to
 hawkeye.”
 the road had never been made except by the travel over it, and at this
 season—the rainy june—it was a way of ruts cut in the black
 soil, and of fathomless mud-holes. in the principal street of the city, it
 had received more attention; for hogs, great and small, rooted about in it
 and wallowed in it, turning the street into a liquid quagmire which could
 only be crossed on pieces of plank thrown here and there.
 about the chief cabin, which was the store and grocery of this mart of
 trade, the mud was more liquid than elsewhere, and the rude platform in
 front of it and the dry-goods boxes mounted thereon were places of refuge
 for all the loafers of the place. down by the stream was a dilapidated
 building which served for a hemp warehouse, and a shaky wharf extended out
 from it, into the water. in fact a flat-boat was there moored by it, it’s
 setting poles lying across the gunwales. above the town the stream was
 crossed by a crazy wooden bridge, the supports of which leaned all ways in
 the soggy soil; the absence of a plank here and there in the flooring made
 the crossing of the bridge faster than a walk an offense not necessary to
 be prohibited by law.
 “this, gentlemen,” said jeff, “is columbus river, alias goose run. if it
 was widened, and deepened, and straightened, and made, long enough, it
 would be one of the finest rivers in the western country.”
 as the sun rose and sent his level beams along the stream, the thin
 stratum of mist, or malaria, rose also and dispersed, but the light was
 not able to enliven the dull water nor give any hint of its apparently
 fathomless depth. venerable mud-turtles crawled up and roosted upon the
 old logs in the stream, their backs glistening in the sun, the first
 inhabitants of the metropolis to begin the active business of the day.
 it was not long, however, before smoke began to issue from the city
 chimneys; and before the engineers had finished their breakfast they were
 the object of the curious inspection of six or eight boys and men, who
 lounged into the camp and gazed about them with languid interest, their
 hands in their pockets every one.
 “good morning; gentlemen,” called out the chief engineer, from the table.
 “good mawning,” drawled out the spokesman of the party. “i allow
 thish-yers the railroad, i heern it was a-comin’.”
 “yes, this is the railroad; all but the rails and the ironhorse.”
 “i reckon you kin git all the rails you want oaten my white oak timber
 over, thar,” replied the first speaker, who appeared to be a man of
 property and willing to strike up a trade.
 “you’ll have to negotiate with the contractors about the rails, sir,” said
 jeff; “here’s mr. brierly, i’ve no doubt would like to buy your rails when
 the time comes.”
 “o,” said the man, “i thought maybe you’d fetch the whole bilin along with
 you. but if you want rails, i’ve got em, haint i eph.”
 “heaps,” said eph, without taking his eyes off the group at the table.
 “well,” said mr. thompson, rising from his seat and moving towards his
 tent, “the railroad has come to stone’s landing, sure; i move we take a
 drink on it all round.”
 the proposal met with universal favor. jeff gave prosperity to stone’s
 landing and navigation to goose run, and the toast was washed down with
 gusto, in the simple fluid of corn; and with the return compliment that a
 rail road was a good thing, and that jeff thompson was no slouch.
 about ten o’clock a horse and wagon was descried making a slow approach to
 the camp over the prairie. as it drew near, the wagon was seen to contain
 a portly gentleman, who hitched impatiently forward on his seat, shook the
 reins and gently touched up his horse, in the vain attempt to communicate
 his own energy to that dull beast, and looked eagerly at the tents. when
 the conveyance at length drew up to mr. thompson’s door, the gentleman
 descended with great deliberation, straightened himself up, rubbed his
 hands, and beaming satisfaction from every part of his radiant frame,
 advanced to the group that was gathered to welcome him, and which had
 saluted him by name as soon as he came within hearing.
 “welcome to napoleon, gentlemen, welcome. i am proud to see you here mr.
 thompson. you are, looking well mr. sterling. this is the country, sir.
 right glad to see you mr. brierly. you got that basket of champagne? no?
 those blasted river thieves! i’ll never send anything more by ’em. the
 best brand, roederer. the last i had in my cellar, from a lot sent me by
 sir george gore—took him out on a buffalo hunt, when he visited our
 country. is always sending me some trifle. you haven’t looked about any
 yet, gentlemen? it’s in the rough yet, in the rough. those buildings will
 all have to come down. that’s the place for the public square, court
 house, hotels, churches, jail—all that sort of thing. about where we
 stand, the deepo. how does that strike your engineering eye, mr. thompson?
 down yonder the business streets, running to the wharves. the university
 up there, on rising ground, sightly place, see the river for miles. that’s
 columbus river, only forty-nine miles to the missouri. you see what it is,
 placid, steady, no current to interfere with navigation, wants widening in
 places and dredging, dredge out the harbor and raise a levee in front of
 the town; made by nature on purpose for a mart. look at all this country,
 not another building within ten miles, no other navigable stream, lay of
 the land points right here; hemp, tobacco, corn, must come here. the
 railroad will do it, napoleon won’t know itself in a year.”
 “don’t now evidently,” said philip aside to harry. “have you breakfasted
 colonel?”
 “hastily. cup of coffee. can’t trust any coffee i don’t import myself. but
 i put up a basket of provisions,—wife would put in a few delicacies,
 women always will, and a half dozen of that burgundy, i was telling you of
 mr. briefly. by the way, you never got to dine with me.” and the colonel
 strode away to the wagon and looked under the seat for the basket.
 apparently it was not there. for the colonel raised up the flap, looked in
 front and behind, and then exclaimed,
 “confound it. that comes of not doing a thing yourself. i trusted to the
 women folks to set that basket in the wagon, and it ain’t there.”
 the camp cook speedily prepared a savory breakfast for the colonel,
 broiled chicken, eggs, corn-bread, and coffee, to which he did ample
 justice, and topped off with a drop of old bourbon, from mr. thompson’s
 private store, a brand which he said he knew well, he should think it came
 from his own sideboard.
 while the engineer corps went to the field, to run back a couple of miles
 and ascertain, approximately, if a road could ever get down to the
 landing, and to sight ahead across the run, and see if it could ever get
 out again, col. sellers and harry sat down and began to roughly map out
 the city of napoleon on a large piece of drawing paper.
 “i’ve got the refusal of a mile square here,” said the colonel, “in our
 names, for a year, with a quarter interest reserved for the four owners.”
 they laid out the town liberally, not lacking room, leaving space for the
 railroad to come in, and for the river as it was to be when improved.
 the engineers reported that the railroad could come in, by taking a little
 sweep and crossing the stream on a high bridge, but the grades would be
 steep. col. sellers said he didn’t care so much about the grades, if the
 road could only be made to reach the elevators on the river. the next day
 mr. thompson made a hasty survey of the stream for a mile or two, so that
 the colonel and harry were enabled to show on their map how nobly that
 would accommodate the city. jeff took a little writing from the colonel
 and harry for a prospective share but philip declined to join in, saying
 that he had no money, and didn’t want to make engagements he couldn’t
 fulfill.
 the next morning the camp moved on, followed till it was out of sight by
 the listless eyes of the group in front of the store, one of whom remarked
 that, “he’d be doggoned if he ever expected to see that railroad any mo’.”
 harry went with the colonel to hawkeye to complete their arrangements, a
 part of which was the preparation of a petition to congress for the
 improvement of the navigation of columbus river.
 eight years have passed since the death of mr. hawkins. eight years are
 not many in the life of a nation or the history of a state, but they may
 be years of destiny that shall fix the current of the century following.
 such years were those that followed the little scrimmage on lexington
 common. such years were those that followed the double-shotted demand for
 the surrender of fort sumter. history is never done with inquiring of
 these years, and summoning witnesses about them, and trying to understand
 their significance.
 the eight years in america from  to  uprooted institutions that
 were centuries old, changed the politics of a people, transformed the
 social life of half the country, and wrought so profoundly upon the entire
 national character that the influence cannot be measured short of two or
 three generations.
 as we are accustomed to interpret the economy of providence, the life of
 the individual is as nothing to that of the nation or the race; but who
 can say, in the broader view and the more intelligent weight of values,
 that the life of one man is not more than that of a nationality, and that
 there is not a tribunal where the tragedy of one human soul shall not seem
 more significant than the overturning of any human institution whatever?
 when one thinks of the tremendous forces of the upper and the nether world
 which play for the mastery of the soul of a woman during the few years in
 which she passes from plastic girlhood to the ripe maturity of womanhood,
 he may well stand in awe before the momentous drama.
 what capacities she has of purity, tenderness, goodness; what capacities
 of vileness, bitterness and evil. nature must needs be lavish with the
 mother and creator of men, and centre in her all the possibilities of
 life. and a few critical years can decide whether her life is to be full
 of sweetness and light, whether she is to be the vestal of a holy temple,
 or whether she will be the fallen priestess of a desecrated shrine. there
 are women, it is true, who seem to be capable neither of rising much nor
 of falling much, and whom a conventional life saves from any special
 development of character.
 but laura was not one of them. she had the fatal gift of beauty, and that
 more fatal gift which does not always accompany mere beauty, the power of
 fascination, a power that may, indeed, exist without beauty. she had will,
 and pride and courage and ambition, and she was left to be very much her
 own guide at the age when romance comes to the aid of passion, and when
 the awakening powers of her vigorous mind had little object on which to
 discipline themselves.
 the tremendous conflict that was fought in this girl’s soul none of those
 about her knew, and very few knew that her life had in it anything unusual
 or romantic or strange.
 those were troublous days in hawkeye as well as in most other missouri
 towns, days of confusion, when between unionist and confederate
 occupations, sudden maraudings and bush-whackings and raids, individuals
 escaped observation or comment in actions that would have filled the town
 with scandal in quiet times.
 fortunately we only need to deal with laura’s life at this period
 historically, and look back upon such portions of it as will serve to
 reveal the woman as she was at the time of the arrival of mr. harry
 brierly in hawkeye.
 the hawkins family were settled there, and had a hard enough struggle with
 poverty and the necessity of keeping up appearances in accord with their
 own family pride and the large expectations they secretly cherished of a
 fortune in the knobs of east tennessee. how pinched they were perhaps no
 one knew but clay, to whom they looked for almost their whole support.
 washington had been in hawkeye off and on, attracted away occasionally by
 some tremendous speculation, from which he invariably returned to gen.
 boswell’s office as poor as he went. he was the inventor of no one knew
 how many useless contrivances, which were not worth patenting, and his
 years had been passed in dreaming and planning to no purpose; until he was
 now a man of about thirty, without a profession or a permanent occupation,
 a tall, brown-haired, dreamy person of the best intentions and the
 frailest resolution. probably however the eight years had been happier to
 him than to any others in his circle, for the time had been mostly spent
 in a blissful dream of the coming of enormous wealth.
 he went out with a company from hawkeye to the war, and was not wanting in
 courage, but he would have been a better soldier if he had been less
 engaged in contrivances for circumventing the enemy by strategy unknown to
 the books.
 it happened to him to be captured in one of his self-appointed
 expeditions, but the federal colonel released him, after a short
 examination, satisfied that he could most injure the confederate forces
 opposed to the unionists by returning him to his regiment. col. sellers
 was of course a prominent man during the war. he was captain of the home
 guards in hawkeye, and he never left home except upon one occasion, when
 on the strength of a rumor, he executed a flank movement and fortified
 stone’s landing, a place which no one unacquainted with the country would
 be likely to find.
 “gad,” said the colonel afterwards, “the landing is the key to upper
 missouri, and it is the only place the enemy never captured. if other
 places had been defended as well as that was, the result would have been
 different, sir.”
 the colonel had his own theories about war as he had in other things. if
 everybody had stayed at home as he did, he said, the south never would
 have been conquered. for what would there have been to conquer? mr. jeff
 davis was constantly writing him to take command of a corps in the
 confederate army, but col. sellers said, no, his duty was at home. and he
 was by no means idle. he was the inventor of the famous air torpedo, which
 came very near destroying the union armies in missouri, and the city of
 st. louis itself.
 his plan was to fill a torpedo with greek fire and poisonous and deadly
 missiles, attach it to a balloon, and then let it sail away over the
 hostile camp and explode at the right moment, when the time-fuse burned
 out. he intended to use this invention in the capture of st. louis,
 exploding his torpedoes over the city, and raining destruction upon it
 until the army of occupation would gladly capitulate. he was unable to
 procure the greek fire, but he constructed a vicious torpedo which would
 have answered the purpose, but the first one prematurely exploded in his
 wood-house, blowing it clean away, and setting fire to his house. the
 neighbors helped him put out the conflagration, but they discouraged any
 more experiments of that sort.
 the patriotic old gentleman, however, planted so much powder and so many
 explosive contrivances in the roads leading into hawkeye, and then forgot
 the exact spots of danger, that people were afraid to travel the highways,
 and used to come to town across the fields. the colonel’s motto was,
 “millions for defence but not one cent for tribute.”
 when laura came to hawkeye she might have forgotten the annoyances of the
 gossips of murpheysburg and have out lived the bitterness that was growing
 in her heart, if she had been thrown less upon herself, or if the
 surroundings of her life had been more congenial and helpful. but she had
 little society, less and less as she grew older that was congenial to her,
 and her mind preyed upon itself; and the mystery of her birth at once
 chagrined her and raised in her the most extravagant expectations. she was
 proud and she felt the sting of poverty. she could not but be conscious of
 her beauty also, and she was vain of that, and came to take a sort of
 delight in the exercise of her fascinations upon the rather loutish young
 men who came in her way and whom she despised.
 there was another world opened to her—a world of books. but it was
 not the best world of that sort, for the small libraries she had access to
 in hawkeye were decidedly miscellaneous, and largely made up of romances
 and fictions which fed her imagination with the most exaggerated notions
 of life, and showed her men and women in a very false sort of heroism.
 from these stories she learned what a woman of keen intellect and some
 culture joined to beauty and fascination of manner, might expect to
 accomplish in society as she read of it; and along with these ideas she
 imbibed other very crude ones in regard to the emancipation of woman.
 there were also other books—histories, biographies of distinguished
 people, travels in far lands, poems, especially those of byron, scott and
 shelley and moore, which she eagerly absorbed, and appropriated therefrom
 what was to her liking. nobody in hawkeye had read so much or, after a
 fashion, studied so diligently as laura. she passed for an accomplished
 girl, and no doubt thought herself one, as she was, judged by any standard
 near her.
 during the war there came to hawkeye a confederate officer, col. selby,
 who was stationed there for a time, in command of that district. he was a
 handsome, soldierly man of thirty years, a graduate of the university of
 virginia, and of distinguished family, if his story might be believed,
 and, it was evident, a man of the world and of extensive travel and
 adventure.
 to find in such an out of the way country place a woman like laura was a
 piece of good luck upon which col. selby congratulated himself. he was
 studiously polite to her and treated her with a consideration to which she
 was unaccustomed. she had read of such men, but she had never seen one
 before, one so high-bred, so noble in sentiment, so entertaining in
 conversation, so engaging in manner.
 it is a long story; unfortunately it is an old story, and it need not be
 dwelt on. laura loved him, and believed that his love for her was as pure
 and deep as her own. she worshipped him and would have counted her life a
 little thing to give him, if he would only love her and let her feed the
 hunger of her heart upon him.
 the passion possessed her whole being, and lifted her up, till she seemed
 to walk on air. it was all true, then, the romances she had read, the
 bliss of love she had dreamed of. why had she never noticed before how
 blithesome the world was, how jocund with love; the birds sang it, the
 trees whispered it to her as she passed, the very flowers beneath her feet
 strewed the way as for a bridal march.
 when the colonel went away they were engaged to be married, as soon as he
 could make certain arrangements which he represented to be necessary, and
 quit the army. he wrote to her from harding, a small town in the southwest
 corner of the state, saying that he should be held in the service longer
 than he had expected, but that it would not be more than a few months,
 then he should be at liberty to take her to chicago where he had property,
 and should have business, either now or as soon as the war was over, which
 he thought could not last long. meantime why should they be separated? he
 was established in comfortable quarters, and if she could find company and
 join him, they would be married, and gain so many more months of
 happiness.
 was woman ever prudent when she loved? laura went to harding, the
 neighbors supposed to nurse washington who had fallen ill there. her
 engagement was, of course, known in hawkeye, and was indeed a matter of
 pride to her family. mrs. hawkins would have told the first inquirer that.
 laura had gone to be married; but laura had cautioned her; she did not
 want to be thought of, she said, as going in search of a husband; let the
 news come back after she was married.
 so she traveled to harding on the pretence we have mentioned, and was
 married. she was married, but something must have happened on that very
 day or the next that alarmed her. washington did not know then or after
 what it was, but laura bound him not to send news of her marriage to
 hawkeye yet, and to enjoin her mother not to speak of it. whatever cruel
 suspicion or nameless dread this was, laura tried bravely to put it away,
 and not let it cloud her happiness.
 communication that summer, as may be imagined, was neither regular nor
 frequent between the remote confederate camp at harding and hawkeye, and
 laura was in a measure lost sight of—indeed, everyone had troubles
 enough of his own without borrowing from his neighbors.
 laura had given herself utterly to her husband, and if he had faults, if
 he was selfish, if he was sometimes coarse, if he was dissipated, she did
 not or would not see it. it was the passion of her life, the time when her
 whole nature went to flood tide and swept away all barriers. was her
 husband ever cold or indifferent? she shut her eyes to everything but her
 sense of possession of her idol.
 three months passed. one morning her husband informed her that he had been
 ordered south, and must go within two hours.
 “i can be ready,” said laura, cheerfully.
 “but i can’t take you. you must go back to hawkeye.”
 “can’t-take-me?” laura asked, with wonder in her eyes. “i can’t live
 without you. you said——-”
 “o bother what i said,”—and the colonel took up his sword to buckle
 it on, and then continued coolly, “the fact is laura, our romance is
 played out.”
 laura heard, but she did not comprehend. she caught his arm and cried,
 “george, how can you joke so cruelly? i will go any where with you. i will
 wait any where. i can’t go back to hawkeye.”
 “well, go where you like. perhaps,” continued he with a sneer, “you would
 do as well to wait here, for another colonel.”
 laura’s brain whirled. she did not yet comprehend. “what does this mean?
 where are you going?”
 “it means,” said the officer, in measured words, “that you haven’t
 anything to show for a legal marriage, and that i am going to new
 orleans.”
 “it’s a lie, george, it’s a lie. i am your wife. i shall go. i shall
 follow you to new orleans.”
 “perhaps my wife might not like it!”
 laura raised her head, her eyes flamed with fire, she tried to utter a
 cry, and fell senseless on the floor.
 when she came to herself the colonel was gone. washington hawkins stood at
 her bedside. did she come to herself? was there anything left in her heart
 but hate and bitterness, a sense of an infamous wrong at the hands of the
 only man she had ever loved?
 she returned to hawkeye. with the exception of washington and his mother,
 no one knew what had happened. the neighbors supposed that the engagement
 with col. selby had fallen through. laura was ill for a long time, but she
 recovered; she had that resolution in her that could conquer death almost.
 and with her health came back her beauty, and an added fascination, a
 something that might be mistaken for sadness. is there a beauty in the
 knowledge of evil, a beauty that shines out in the face of a person whose
 inward life is transformed by some terrible experience? is the pathos in
 the eyes of the beatrice cenci from her guilt or her innocence?
 laura was not much changed. the lovely woman had a devil in her heart.
 that was all.
 mr. harry brierly drew his pay as an engineer while he was living at the
 city hotel in hawkeye. mr. thompson had been kind enough to say that it
 didn’t make any difference whether he was with the corps or not; and
 although harry protested to the colonel daily and to washington hawkins
 that he must go back at once to the line and superintend the lay-out with
 reference to his contract, yet he did not go, but wrote instead long
 letters to philip, instructing him to keep his eye out, and to let him
 know when any difficulty occurred that required his presence.
 meantime harry blossomed out in the society of hawkeye, as he did in any
 society where fortune cast him and he had the slightest opportunity to
 expand. indeed the talents of a rich and accomplished young fellow like
 harry were not likely to go unappreciated in such a place. a land
 operator, engaged in vast speculations, a favorite in the select circles
 of new york, in correspondence with brokers and bankers, intimate with
 public men at washington, one who could play the guitar and touch the
 banjo lightly, and who had an eye for a pretty girl, and knew the language
 of flattery, was welcome everywhere in hawkeye. even miss laura hawkins
 thought it worth while to use her fascinations upon him, and to endeavor
 to entangle the volatile fellow in the meshes of her attractions.
 “gad,” says harry to the colonel, “she’s a superb creature, she’d make a
 stir in new york, money or no money. there are men i know would give her a
 railroad or an opera house, or whatever she wanted—at least they’d
 promise.”
 harry had a way of looking at women as he looked at anything else in the
 world he wanted, and he half resolved to appropriate miss laura, during
 his stay in hawkeye. perhaps the colonel divined his thoughts, or was
 offended at harry’s talk, for he replied,
 “no nonsense, mr. brierly. nonsense won’t do in hawkeye, not with my
 friends. the hawkins’ blood is good blood, all the way from tennessee. the
 hawkinses are under the weather now, but their tennessee property is
 millions when it comes into market.”
 “of course, colonel. not the least offense intended. but you can see she
 is a fascinating woman. i was only thinking, as to this appropriation,
 now, what such a woman could do in washington. all correct, too, all
 correct. common thing, i assure you in washington; the wives of senators,
 representatives, cabinet officers, all sorts of wives, and some who are
 not wives, use their influence. you want an appointment? do you go to
 senator x? not much. you get on the right side of his wife. is it an
 appropriation? you’d go straight to the committee, or to the interior
 office, i suppose? you’d learn better than that. it takes a woman to get
 any thing through the land office: i tell you, miss laura would fascinate
 an appropriation right through the senate and the house of representatives
 in one session, if she was in washington, as your friend, colonel, of
 course as your friend.”
 “would you have her sign our petition?” asked the colonel, innocently.
 harry laughed. “women don’t get anything by petitioning congress; nobody
 does, that’s for form. petitions are referred somewhere, and that’s the
 last of them; you can’t refer a handsome woman so easily, when she is
 present. they prefer ’em mostly.”
 the petition however was elaborately drawn up, with a glowing description
 of napoleon and the adjacent country, and a statement of the absolute
 necessity to the prosperity of that region and of one of the stations on
 the great through route to the pacific, of the immediate improvement of
 columbus river; to this was appended a map of the city and a survey of the
 river. it was signed by all the people at stone’s landing who could write
 their names, by col. beriah sellers, and the colonel agreed to have the
 names headed by all the senators and representatives from the state and by
 a sprinkling of ex-governors and ex-members of congress. when completed it
 was a formidable document. its preparation and that of more minute plots
 of the new city consumed the valuable time of sellers and harry for many
 weeks, and served to keep them both in the highest spirits.
 in the eyes of washington hawkins, harry was a superior being, a man who
 was able to bring things to pass in a way that excited his enthusiasm. he
 never tired of listening to his stories of what he had done and of what he
 was going to do. as for washington, harry thought he was a man of ability
 and comprehension, but “too visionary,” he told the colonel. the colonel
 said he might be right, but he had never noticed anything visionary about
 him.
 “he’s got his plans, sir. god bless my soul, at his age, i was full of
 plans. but experience sobers a man, i never touch any thing now that
 hasn’t been weighed in my judgment; and when beriah sellers puts his
 judgment on a thing, there it is.”
 whatever might have been harry’s intentions with regard to laura, he saw
 more and more of her every day, until he got to be restless and nervous
 when he was not with her.
 that consummate artist in passion allowed him to believe that the
 fascination was mainly on his side, and so worked upon his vanity, while
 inflaming his ardor, that he scarcely knew what he was about. her coolness
 and coyness were even made to appear the simple precautions of a modest
 timidity, and attracted him even more than the little tendernesses into
 which she was occasionally surprised. he could never be away from her
 long, day or evening; and in a short time their intimacy was the town
 talk. she played with him so adroitly that harry thought she was absorbed
 in love for him, and yet he was amazed that he did not get on faster in
 his conquest.
 and when he thought of it, he was piqued as well. a country girl, poor
 enough, that was evident; living with her family in a cheap and most
 unattractive frame house, such as carpenters build in america, scantily
 furnished and unadorned; without the adventitious aids of dress or jewels
 or the fine manners of society—harry couldn’t understand it. but she
 fascinated him, and held him just beyond the line of absolute familiarity
 at the same time. while he was with her she made him forget that the
 hawkins’ house was nothing but a wooden tenement, with four small square
 rooms on the ground floor and a half story; it might have been a palace
 for aught he knew.
 perhaps laura was older than harry. she was, at any rate, at that ripe age
 when beauty in woman seems more solid than in the budding period of
 girlhood, and she had come to understand her powers perfectly, and to know
 exactly how much of the susceptibility and archness of the girl it was
 profitable to retain. she saw that many women, with the best intentions,
 make a mistake of carrying too much girlishness into womanhood. such a
 woman would have attracted harry at any time, but only a woman with a cool
 brain and exquisite art could have made him lose his head in this way; for
 harry thought himself a man of the world. the young fellow never dreamed
 that he was merely being experimented on; he was to her a man of another
 society and another culture, different from that she had any knowledge of
 except in books, and she was not unwilling to try on him the fascinations
 of her mind and person.
 for laura had her dreams. she detested the narrow limits in which her lot
 was cast, she hated poverty. much of her reading had been of modern works
 of fiction, written by her own sex, which had revealed to her something of
 her own powers and given her indeed, an exaggerated notion of the
 influence, the wealth, the position a woman may attain who has beauty and
 talent and ambition and a little culture, and is not too scrupulous in the
 use of them. she wanted to be rich, she wanted luxury, she wanted men at
 her feet, her slaves, and she had not—thanks to some of the novels
 she had read—the nicest discrimination between notoriety and
 reputation; perhaps she did not know how fatal notoriety usually is to the
 bloom of womanhood.
 with the other hawkins children laura had been brought up in the belief
 that they had inherited a fortune in the tennessee lands. she did not by
 any means share all the delusion of the family; but her brain was not
 seldom busy with schemes about it. washington seemed to her only to dream
 of it and to be willing to wait for its riches to fall upon him in a
 golden shower; but she was impatient, and wished she were a man to take
 hold of the business.
 “you men must enjoy your schemes and your activity and liberty to go about
 the world,” she said to harry one day, when he had been talking of new
 york and washington and his incessant engagements.
 “oh, yes,” replied that martyr to business, “it’s all well enough, if you
 don’t have too much of it, but it only has one object.”
 “what is that?”
 “if a woman doesn’t know, it’s useless to tell her. what do you suppose i
 am staying in hawkeye for, week after week, when i ought to be with my
 corps?”
 “i suppose it’s your business with col. sellers about napoleon, you’ve
 always told me so,” answered laura, with a look intended to contradict her
 words.
 “and now i tell you that is all arranged, i suppose you’ll tell me i ought
 to go?”
 “harry!” exclaimed laura, touching his arm and letting her pretty hand
 rest there a moment. “why should i want you to go away? the only person in
 hawkeye who understands me.”
 “but you refuse to understand me,” replied harry, flattered but still
 petulant. “you are like an iceberg, when we are alone.”
 laura looked up with wonder in her great eyes, and something like a blush
 suffusing her face, followed by a look of langour that penetrated harry’s
 heart as if it had been longing.
 “did i ever show any want of confidence in you, harry?” and she gave him
 her hand, which harry pressed with effusion—something in her manner
 told him that he must be content with that favor.
 it was always so. she excited his hopes and denied him, inflamed his
 passion and restrained it, and wound him in her toils day by day. to what
 purpose? it was keen delight to laura to prove that she had power over
 men.
 laura liked to hear about life at the east, and especially about the
 luxurious society in which mr. brierly moved when he was at home. it
 pleased her imagination to fancy herself a queen in it.
 “you should be a winter in washington,” harry said.
 “but i have no acquaintances there.”
 “don’t know any of the families of the congressmen? they like to have a
 pretty woman staying with them.”
 “not one.”
 “suppose col. sellers should, have business there; say, about this
 columbus river appropriation?”
 “sellers!” and laura laughed.
 “you needn’t laugh. queerer things have happened. sellers knows everybody
 from missouri, and from the west, too, for that matter. he’d introduce you
 to washington life quick enough. it doesn’t need a crowbar to break your
 way into society there as it does in philadelphia. it’s democratic,
 washington is. money or beauty will open any door. if i were a handsome
 woman, i shouldn’t want any better place than the capital to pick up a
 prince or a fortune.”
 “thank you,” replied laura. “but i prefer the quiet of home, and the love
 of those i know;” and her face wore a look of sweet contentment and
 unworldliness that finished mr. harry brierly for the day.
 nevertheless, the hint that harry had dropped fell upon good ground, and
 bore fruit an hundred fold; it worked in her mind until she had built up a
 plan on it, and almost a career for herself. why not, she said, why
 shouldn’t i do as other women have done? she took the first opportunity to
 see col. sellers, and to sound him about the washington visit. how was he
 getting on with his navigation scheme, would it be likely to take him from
 home to jefferson city; or to washington, perhaps?
 “well, maybe. if the people of napoleon want me to go to washington, and
 look after that matter, i might tear myself from my home. it’s been
 suggested to me, but—not a word of it to mrs. sellers and the
 children. maybe they wouldn’t like to think of their father in washington.
 but dilworthy, senator dilworthy, says to me, ‘colonel, you are the man,
 you could influence more votes than any one else on such a measure, an old
 settler, a man of the people, you know the wants of missouri; you’ve a
 respect for religion too, says he, and know how the cause of the gospel
 goes with improvements: which is true enough, miss laura, and hasn’t been
 enough thought of in connection with napoleon. he’s an able man,
 dilworthy, and a good man. a man has got to be good to succeed as he has.
 he’s only been in congress a few years, and he must be worth a million.
 first thing in the morning when he stayed with me he asked about family
 prayers, whether we had ’em before or after breakfast. i hated to
 disappoint the senator, but i had to out with it, tell him we didn’t have
 ’em, not steady. he said he understood, business interruptions and all
 that, some men were well enough without, but as for him he never neglected
 the ordinances of religion. he doubted if the columbus river appropriation
 would succeed if we did not invoke the divine blessing on it.”
 perhaps it is unnecessary to say to the reader that senator dilworthy had
 not stayed with col. sellers while he was in hawkeye; this visit to his
 house being only one of the colonel’s hallucinations—one of those
 instant creations of his fertile fancy, which were always flashing into
 his brain and out of his mouth in the course of any conversation and
 without interrupting the flow of it.
 during the summer philip rode across the country and made a short visit in
 hawkeye, giving harry an opportunity to show him the progress that he and
 the colonel had made in their operation at stone’s landing, to introduce
 him also to laura, and to borrow a little money when he departed. harry
 bragged about his conquest, as was his habit, and took philip round to see
 his western prize.
 laura received mr. philip with a courtesy and a slight hauteur that rather
 surprised and not a little interested him. he saw at once that she was
 older than harry, and soon made up his mind that she was leading his
 friend a country dance to which he was unaccustomed. at least he thought
 he saw that, and half hinted as much to harry, who flared up at once; but
 on a second visit philip was not so sure, the young lady was certainly
 kind and friendly and almost confiding with harry, and treated philip with
 the greatest consideration. she deferred to his opinions, and listened
 attentively when he talked, and in time met his frank manner with an equal
 frankness, so that he was quite convinced that whatever she might feel
 towards harry, she was sincere with him. perhaps his manly way did win her
 liking. perhaps in her mind, she compared him with harry, and recognized
 in him a man to whom a woman might give her whole soul, recklessly and
 with little care if she lost it. philip was not invincible to her beauty
 nor to the intellectual charm of her presence.
 the week seemed very short that he passed in hawkeye, and when he bade
 laura good by, he seemed to have known her a year.
 “we shall see you again, mr. sterling,” she said as she gave him her hand,
 with just a shade of sadness in her handsome eyes.
 and when he turned away she followed him with a look that might have
 disturbed his serenity, if he had not at the moment had a little square
 letter in his breast pocket, dated at philadelphia, and signed “ruth.”
 the visit of senator abner dilworthy was an event in hawkeye. when a
 senator, whose place is in washington moving among the great and guiding
 the destinies of the nation, condescends to mingle among the people and
 accept the hospitalities of such a place as hawkeye, the honor is not
 considered a light one. all parties are flattered by it and politics are
 forgotten in the presence of one so distinguished among his fellows.
 senator dilworthy, who was from a neighboring state, had been a unionist
 in the darkest days of his country, and had thriven by it, but was that
 any reason why col. sellers, who had been a confederate and had not
 thriven by it, should give him the cold shoulder?
 the senator was the guest of his old friend gen. boswell, but it almost
 appeared that he was indebted to col. sellers for the unreserved
 hospitalities of the town. it was the large hearted colonel who, in a
 manner, gave him the freedom of the city.
 “you are known here, sir,” said the colonel, “and hawkeye is proud of you.
 you will find every door open, and a welcome at every hearthstone. i
 should insist upon your going to my house, if you were not claimed by your
 older friend gen. boswell. but you will mingle with our people, and you
 will see here developments that will surprise you.”
 the colonel was so profuse in his hospitality that he must have made the
 impression upon himself that he had entertained the senator at his own
 mansion during his stay; at any rate, he afterwards always spoke of him as
 his guest, and not seldom referred to the senator’s relish of certain
 viands on his table. he did, in fact, press him to dine upon the morning
 of the day the senator was going away.
 senator dilworthy was large and portly, though not tall—a pleasant
 spoken man, a popular man with the people.
 he took a lively interest in the town and all the surrounding country, and
 made many inquiries as to the progress of agriculture, of education, and
 of religion, and especially as to the condition of the emancipated race.
 “providence,” he said, “has placed them in our hands, and although you and
 i, general, might have chosen a different destiny for them, under the
 constitution, yet providence knows best.”
 “you can’t do much with ’em,” interrupted col. sellers. “they are a
 speculating race, sir, disinclined to work for white folks without
 security, planning how to live by only working for themselves. idle, sir,
 there’s my garden just a ruin of weeds. nothing practical in ’em.”
 “there is some truth in your observation, colonel, but you must educate
 them.”
 “you educate the niggro and you make him more speculating than he was
 before. if he won’t stick to any industry except for himself now, what
 will he do then?”
 “but, colonel, the negro when educated will be more able to make his
 speculations fruitful.”
 “never, sir, never. he would only have a wider scope to injure himself. a
 niggro has no grasp, sir. now, a white man can conceive great operations,
 and carry them out; a niggro can’t.”
 “still,” replied the senator, “granting that he might injure himself in a
 worldly point of view, his elevation through education would multiply his
 chances for the hereafter—which is the important thing after all,
 colonel. and no matter what the result is, we must fulfill our duty by
 this being.”
 “i’d elevate his soul,” promptly responded the colonel; “that’s just it;
 you can’t make his soul too immortal, but i wouldn’t touch him, himself.
 yes, sir! make his soul immortal, but don’t disturb the niggro as he is.”
 of course one of the entertainments offered the senator was a public
 reception, held in the court house, at which he made a speech to his
 fellow citizens. col. sellers was master of ceremonies. he escorted the
 band from the city hotel to gen. boswell’s; he marshalled the procession
 of masons, of odd fellows, and of firemen, the good templars, the sons of
 temperance, the cadets of temperance, the daughters of rebecca, the sunday
 school children, and citizens generally, which followed the senator to the
 court house; he bustled about the room long after every one else was
 seated, and loudly cried “order!” in the dead silence which preceded the
 introduction of the senator by gen. boswell. the occasion was one to call
 out his finest powers of personal appearance, and one he long dwelt on
 with pleasure.
 this not being an edition of the congressional globe it is impossible to
 give senator dilworthy’s speech in full. he began somewhat as follows:
 “fellow citizens: it gives me great pleasure to thus meet and mingle with
 you, to lay aside for a moment the heavy duties of an official and
 burdensome station, and confer in familiar converse with my friends in
 your great state. the good opinion of my fellow citizens of all sections
 is the sweetest solace in all my anxieties. i look forward with longing to
 the time when i can lay aside the cares of office—” [“dam sight,”
 shouted a tipsy fellow near the door. cries of “put him out.”]
 “my friends, do not remove him. let the misguided man stay. i see that he
 is a victim of that evil which is swallowing up public virtue and sapping
 the foundation of society. as i was saying, when i can lay down the cares
 of office and retire to the sweets of private life in some such sweet,
 peaceful, intelligent, wide-awake and patriotic place as hawkeye
 (applause). i have traveled much, i have seen all parts of our glorious
 union, but i have never seen a lovelier village than yours, or one that
 has more signs of commercial and industrial and religious prosperity—(more
 applause).”
 the senator then launched into a sketch of our great country, and dwelt
 for an hour or more upon its prosperity and the dangers which threatened
 it.
 he then touched reverently upon the institutions of religion, and upon the
 necessity of private purity, if we were to have any public morality. “i
 trust,” he said, “that there are children within the sound of my voice,”
 and after some remarks to them, the senator closed with an apostrophe to
 “the genius of american liberty, walking with the sunday school in one
 hand and temperance in the other up the glorified steps of the national
 capitol.”
 col. sellers did not of course lose the opportunity to impress upon so
 influential a person as the senator the desirability of improving the
 navigation of columbus river. he and mr. brierly took the senator over to
 napoleon and opened to him their plan. it was a plan that the senator
 could understand without a great deal of explanation, for he seemed to be
 familiar with the like improvements elsewhere. when, however, they reached
 stone’s landing the senator looked about him and inquired,
 “is this napoleon?”
 “this is the nucleus, the nucleus,” said the colonel, unrolling his map.
 “here is the deepo, the church, the city hall and so on.”
 “ah, i see. how far from here is columbus river? does that stream empty——”
 “that, why, that’s goose run. thar ain’t no columbus, thout’n it’s over to
 hawkeye,” interrupted one of the citizens, who had come out to stare at
 the strangers. “a railroad come here last summer, but it haint been here
 no mo’.”
 “yes, sir,” the colonel hastened to explain, “in the old records columbus
 river is called goose run. you see how it sweeps round the town—forty-nine
 miles to the missouri; sloop navigation all the way pretty much drains
 this whole country; when it’s improved steamboats will run right up here.
 it’s got to be enlarged, deepened. you see by the map. columbus river.
 this country must have water communication!”
 “you’ll want a considerable appropriation, col. sellers.
 “i should say a million; is that your figure mr. brierly.”
 “according to our surveys,” said harry, “a million would do it; a million
 spent on the river would make napoleon worth two millions at least.”
 “i see,” nodded the senator. “but you’d better begin by asking only for
 two or three hundred thousand, the usual way. you can begin to sell town
 lots on that appropriation you know.”
 the senator, himself, to do him justice, was not very much interested in
 the country or the stream, but he favored the appropriation, and he gave
 the colonel and mr. brierly to understand that he would endeavor to get it
 through. harry, who thought he was shrewd and understood washington,
 suggested an interest.
 but he saw that the senator was wounded by the suggestion.
 “you will offend me by repeating such an observation,” he said. “whatever
 i do will be for the public interest. it will require a portion of the
 appropriation for necessary expenses, and i am sorry to say that there are
 members who will have to be seen. but you can reckon upon my humble
 services.”
 this aspect of the subject was not again alluded to. the senator possessed
 himself of the facts, not from his observation of the ground, but from the
 lips of col. sellers, and laid the appropriation scheme away among his
 other plans for benefiting the public.
 it was on this visit also that the senator made the acquaintance of mr.
 washington hawkins, and was greatly taken with his innocence, his
 guileless manner and perhaps with his ready adaptability to enter upon any
 plan proposed.
 col. sellers was pleased to see this interest that washington had
 awakened, especially since it was likely to further his expectations with
 regard to the tennessee lands; the senator having remarked to the colonel,
 that he delighted to help any deserving young man, when the promotion of a
 private advantage could at the same time be made to contribute to the
 general good. and he did not doubt that this was an opportunity of that
 kind.
 the result of several conferences with washington was that the senator
 proposed that he should go to washington with him and become his private
 secretary and the secretary of his committee; a proposal which was eagerly
 accepted.
 the senator spent sunday in hawkeye and attended church. he cheered the
 heart of the worthy and zealous minister by an expression of his sympathy
 in his labors, and by many inquiries in regard to the religious state of
 the region. it was not a very promising state, and the good man felt how
 much lighter his task would be, if he had the aid of such a man as senator
 dilworthy.
 “i am glad to see, my dear sir,” said the senator, “that you give them the
 doctrines. it is owing to a neglect of the doctrines, that there is such a
 fearful falling away in the country. i wish that we might have you in
 washington—as chaplain, now, in the senate.”
 the good man could not but be a little flattered, and if sometimes,
 thereafter, in his discouraging work, he allowed the thought that he might
 perhaps be called to washington as chaplain of the senate, to cheer him,
 who can wonder. the senator’s commendation at least did one service for
 him, it elevated him in the opinion of hawkeye.
 laura was at church alone that day, and mr. brierly walked home with her.
 a part of their way lay with that of general boswell and senator
 dilworthy, and introductions were made. laura had her own reasons for
 wishing to know the senator, and the senator was not a man who could be
 called indifferent to charms such as hers. that meek young lady so
 commended herself to him in the short walk, that he announced his
 intentions of paying his respects to her the next day, an intention which
 harry received glumly; and when the senator was out of hearing he called
 him “an old fool.”
 “fie,” said laura, “i do believe you are jealous, harry. he is a very
 pleasant man. he said you were a young man of great promise.”
 the senator did call next day, and the result of his visit was that he was
 confirmed in his impression that there was something about him very
 attractive to ladies. he saw laura again and again during his stay, and
 felt more and more the subtle influence of her feminine beauty, which
 every man felt who came near her.
 harry was beside himself with rage while the senator remained in town; he
 declared that women were always ready to drop any man for higher game; and
 he attributed his own ill-luck to the senator’s appearance. the fellow was
 in fact crazy about her beauty and ready to beat his brains out in
 chagrin. perhaps laura enjoyed his torment, but she soothed him with
 blandishments that increased his ardor, and she smiled to herself to think
 that he had, with all his protestations of love, never spoken of marriage.
 probably the vivacious fellow never had thought of it. at any rate when he
 at length went away from hawkeye he was no nearer it. but there was no
 telling to what desperate lengths his passion might not carry him.
 laura bade him good bye with tender regret, which, however, did not
 disturb her peace or interfere with her plans. the visit of senator
 dilworthy had become of more importance to her, and it by and by bore the
 fruit she longed for, in an invitation to visit his family in the national
 capital during the winter session of congress.
 o lift your natures up: embrace our aims: work out your
 freedom. girls, knowledge is now no more a fountain sealed;
 drink deep until the habits of the slave, the sins of emptiness,
 gossip and spite and slander, die. the
 princess.
 whether medicine is a science, or only an empirical method of getting a
 living out of the ignorance of the human race, ruth found before her first
 term was over at the medical school that there were other things she
 needed to know quite as much as that which is taught in medical books, and
 that she could never satisfy her aspirations without more general culture.
 “does your doctor know any thing—i don’t mean about medicine, but
 about things in general, is he a man of information and good sense?” once
 asked an old practitioner. “if he doesn’t know anything but medicine the
 chance is he doesn’t know that.”
 the close application to her special study was beginning to tell upon
 ruth’s delicate health also, and the summer brought with it only weariness
 and indisposition for any mental effort.
 in this condition of mind and body the quiet of her home and the
 unexciting companionship of those about her were more than ever tiresome.
 she followed with more interest philip’s sparkling account of his life in
 the west, and longed for his experiences, and to know some of those people
 of a world so different from here, who alternately amused and displeased
 him. he at least was learning the world, the good and the bad of it, as
 must happen to every one who accomplishes anything in it.
 but what, ruth wrote, could a woman do, tied up by custom, and cast into
 particular circumstances out of which it was almost impossible to
 extricate herself? philip thought that he would go some day and extricate
 ruth, but he did not write that, for he had the instinct to know that this
 was not the extrication she dreamed of, and that she must find out by her
 own experience what her heart really wanted.
 philip was not a philosopher, to be sure, but he had the old fashioned
 notion, that whatever a woman’s theories of life might be, she would come
 round to matrimony, only give her time. he could indeed recall to mind one
 woman—and he never knew a nobler—whose whole soul was devoted
 and who believed that her life was consecrated to a certain benevolent
 project in singleness of life, who yielded to the touch of matrimony, as
 an icicle yields to a sunbeam.
 neither at home nor elsewhere did ruth utter any complaint, or admit any
 weariness or doubt of her ability to pursue the path she had marked out
 for herself. but her mother saw clearly enough her struggle with
 infirmity, and was not deceived by either her gaiety or by the cheerful
 composure which she carried into all the ordinary duties that fell to her.
 she saw plainly enough that ruth needed an entire change of scene and of
 occupation, and perhaps she believed that such a change, with the
 knowledge of the world it would bring, would divert ruth from a course for
 which she felt she was physically entirely unfitted.
 it therefore suited the wishes of all concerned, when autumn came, that
 ruth should go away to school. she selected a large new england seminary,
 of which she had often heard philip speak, which was attended by both
 sexes and offered almost collegiate advantages of education. thither she
 went in september, and began for the second time in the year a life new to
 her.
 the seminary was the chief feature of fallkill, a village of two to three
 thousand inhabitants. it was a prosperous school, with three hundred
 students, a large corps of teachers, men and women, and with a venerable
 rusty row of academic buildings on the shaded square of the town. the
 students lodged and boarded in private families in the place, and so it
 came about that while the school did a great deal to support the town, the
 town gave the students society and the sweet influences of home life. it
 is at least respectful to say that the influences of home life are sweet.
 ruth’s home, by the intervention of philip, was in a family—one of
 the rare exceptions in life or in fiction—that had never known
 better days. the montagues, it is perhaps well to say, had intended to
 come over in the mayflower, but were detained at delft haven by the
 illness of a child. they came over to massachusetts bay in another vessel,
 and thus escaped the onus of that brevet nobility under which the
 successors of the mayflower pilgrims have descended. having no factitious
 weight of dignity to carry, the montagues steadily improved their
 condition from the day they landed, and they were never more vigorous or
 prosperous than at the date of this narrative. with character compacted by
 the rigid puritan discipline of more than two centuries, they had retained
 its strength and purity and thrown off its narrowness, and were now
 blossoming under the generous modern influences. squire oliver montague, a
 lawyer who had retired from the practice of his profession except in rare
 cases, dwelt in a square old fashioned new england mansion a quarter of a
 mile away from the green. 
 it was called a mansion because it stood alone with ample fields about it,
 and had an avenue of trees leading to it from the road, and on the west
 commanded a view of a pretty little lake with gentle slopes and nodding
 were now blossoming under the generous modern influences. but it was just
 a plain, roomy house, capable of extending to many guests an unpretending
 hospitality.
 the family consisted of the squire and his wife, a son and a daughter
 married and not at home, a son in college at cambridge, another son at the
 seminary, and a daughter alice, who was a year or more older than ruth.
 having only riches enough to be able to gratify reasonable desires, and
 yet make their gratifications always a novelty and a pleasure, the family
 occupied that just mean in life which is so rarely attained, and still
 more rarely enjoyed without discontent.
 if ruth did not find so much luxury in the house as in her own home, there
 were evidences of culture, of intellectual activity and of a zest in the
 affairs of all the world, which greatly impressed her. every room had its
 book-cases or book-shelves, and was more or less a library; upon every
 table was liable to be a litter of new books, fresh periodicals and daily
 newspapers. 
 there were plants in the sunny windows and some choice engravings on the
 walls, with bits of color in oil or water-colors; the piano was sure to be
 open and strewn with music; and there were photographs and little
 souvenirs here and there of foreign travel. an absence of any “what-pots”
 in the corners with rows of cheerful shells, and hindoo gods, and chinese
 idols, and nests of useless boxes of lacquered wood, might be taken as
 denoting a languidness in the family concerning foreign missions, but
 perhaps unjustly.
 at any rate the life of the world flowed freely into this hospitable
 house, and there was always so much talk there of the news of the day, of
 the new books and of authors, of boston radicalism and new york
 civilization, and the virtue of congress, that small gossip stood a very
 poor chance.
 all this was in many ways so new to ruth that she seemed to have passed
 into another world, in which she experienced a freedom and a mental
 exhilaration unknown to her before. under this influence she entered upon
 her studies with keen enjoyment, finding for a time all the relaxation she
 needed, in the charming social life at the montague house.
 it is strange, she wrote to philip, in one of her occasional letters, that
 you never told me more about this delightful family, and scarcely
 mentioned alice who is the life of it, just the noblest girl, unselfish,
 knows how to do so many things, with lots of talent, with a dry humor, and
 an odd way of looking at things, and yet quiet and even serious often—one
 of your “capable” new england girls. we shall be great friends. it had
 never occurred to philip that there was any thing extraordinary about the
 family that needed mention. he knew dozens of girls like alice, he thought
 to himself, but only one like ruth.
 good friends the two girls were from the beginning. ruth was a study to
 alice; the product of a culture entirely foreign to her experience, so
 much a child in some things, so much a woman in others; and ruth in turn,
 it must be confessed, probing alice sometimes with her serious grey eyes,
 wondered what her object in life was, and whether she had any purpose
 beyond living as she now saw her. for she could scarcely conceive of a
 life that should not be devoted to the accomplishment of some definite
 work, and she had no doubt that in her own case everything else would
 yield to the professional career she had marked out.
 “so you know philip sterling,” said ruth one day as the girls sat at their
 sewing. ruth never embroidered, and never sewed when she could avoid it.
 bless her.
 “oh yes, we are old friends. philip used to come to fallkill often while
 he was in college. he was once rusticated here for a term.”
 “rusticated?”
 “suspended for some college scrape. he was a great favorite here. father
 and he were famous friends. father said that philip had no end of nonsense
 in him and was always blundering into something, but he was a royal good
 fellow and would come out all right.”
 “did you think he was fickle?”
 “why, i never thought whether he was or not,” replied alice looking up. “i
 suppose he was always in love with some girl or another, as college boys
 are. he used to make me his confidant now and then, and be terribly in the
 dumps.”
 “why did he come to you?” pursued ruth, “you were younger than he.”
 “i’m sure i don’t know. he was at our house a good deal. once at a picnic
 by the lake, at the risk of his own life, he saved sister millie from
 drowning, and we all liked to have him here. perhaps he thought as he had
 saved one sister, the other ought to help him when he was in trouble. i
 don’t know.”
 the fact was that alice was a person who invited confidences, because she
 never betrayed them, and gave abundant sympathy in return. there are
 persons, whom we all know, to whom human confidences, troubles and
 heart-aches flow as naturally as streams to a placid lake.
 this is not a history of fallkill, nor of the montague family, worthy as
 both are of that honor, and this narrative cannot be diverted into long
 loitering with them. if the reader visits the village to-day, he will
 doubtless be pointed out the montague dwelling, where ruth lived, the
 cross-lots path she traversed to the seminary, and the venerable chapel
 with its cracked bell.
 in the little society of the place, the quaker girl was a favorite, and no
 considerable social gathering or pleasure party was thought complete
 without her. there was something in this seemingly transparent and yet
 deep character, in her childlike gaiety and enjoyment of the society about
 her, and in her not seldom absorption in herself, that would have made her
 long remembered there if no events had subsequently occurred to recall her
 to mind.
 to the surprise of alice, ruth took to the small gaieties of the village
 with a zest of enjoyment that seemed foreign to one who had devoted her
 life to a serious profession from the highest motives. alice liked society
 well enough, she thought, but there was nothing exciting in that of
 fallkill, nor anything novel in the attentions of the well-bred young
 gentlemen one met in it. it must have worn a different aspect to ruth, for
 she entered into its pleasures at first with curiosity, and then with
 interest and finally with a kind of staid abandon that no one would have
 deemed possible for her. parties, picnics, rowing-matches, moonlight
 strolls, nutting expeditions in the october woods,—alice declared
 that it was a whirl of dissipation. the fondness of ruth, which was
 scarcely disguised, for the company of agreeable young fellows, who talked
 nothings, gave alice opportunity for no end of banter.
 “do you look upon them as i subjects, dear?” she would ask.
 and ruth laughed her merriest laugh, and then looked sober again. perhaps
 she was thinking, after all, whether she knew herself.
 if you should rear a duck in the heart of the sahara, no doubt it would
 swim if you brought it to the nile.
 surely no one would have predicted when ruth left philadelphia that she
 would become absorbed to this extent, and so happy, in a life so unlike
 that she thought she desired. but no one can tell how a woman will act
 under any circumstances. the reason novelists nearly always fail in
 depicting women when they make them act, is that they let them do what
 they have observed some woman has done at sometime or another. and that is
 where they make a mistake; for a woman will never do again what has been
 done before. it is this uncertainty that causes women, considered as
 materials for fiction, to be so interesting to themselves and to others.
 as the fall went on and the winter, ruth did not distinguish herself
 greatly at the fallkill seminary as a student, a fact that apparently gave
 her no anxiety, and did not diminish her enjoyment of a new sort of power
 which had awakened within her.
 in mid-winter, an event occurred of unusual interest to the inhabitants of
 the montague house, and to the friends of the young ladies who sought
 their society.
 this was the arrival at the sassacua hotel of two young gentlemen from the
 west.
 it is the fashion in new england to give indian names to the public
 houses, not that the late lamented savage knew how to keep a hotel, but
 that his warlike name may impress the traveler who humbly craves shelter
 there, and make him grateful to the noble and gentlemanly clerk if he is
 allowed to depart with his scalp safe.
 the two young gentlemen were neither students for the fallkill seminary,
 nor lecturers on physiology, nor yet life assurance solicitors, three
 suppositions that almost exhausted the guessing power of the people at the
 hotel in respect to the names of “philip sterling and henry brierly,
 missouri,” on the register. they were handsome enough fellows, that was
 evident, browned by out-door exposure, and with a free and lordly way
 about them that almost awed the hotel clerk himself. indeed, he very soon
 set down mr. brierly as a gentleman of large fortune, with enormous
 interests on his shoulders. harry had a way of casually mentioning western
 investments, through lines, the freighting business, and the route through
 the indian territory to lower california, which was calculated to give an
 importance to his lightest word.
 “you’ve a pleasant town here, sir, and the most comfortable looking hotel
 i’ve seen out of new york,” said harry to the clerk; “we shall stay here a
 few days if you can give us a roomy suite of apartments.”
 harry usually had the best of everything, wherever he went, as such
 fellows always do have in this accommodating world. philip would have been
 quite content with less expensive quarters, but there was no resisting
 harry’s generosity in such matters.
 railroad surveying and real-estate operations were at a standstill during
 the winter in missouri, and the young men had taken advantage of the lull
 to come east, philip to see if there was any disposition in his friends,
 the railway contractors, to give him a share in the salt lick union
 pacific extension, and harry to open out to his uncle the prospects of the
 new city at stone’s landing, and to procure congressional appropriations
 for the harbor and for making goose run navigable. harry had with him a
 map of that noble stream and of the harbor, with a perfect net-work of
 railroads centering in it, pictures of wharves, crowded with steamboats,
 and of huge grain-elevators on the bank, all of which grew out of the
 combined imaginations of col. sellers and mr. brierly. the colonel had
 entire confidence in harry’s influence with wall street, and with
 congressmen, to bring about the consummation of their scheme, and he
 waited his return in the empty house at hawkeye, feeding his pinched
 family upon the most gorgeous expectations with a reckless prodigality.
 “don’t let ’em into the thing more than is necessary,” says the colonel to
 harry; “give ’em a small interest; a lot apiece in the suburbs of the
 landing ought to do a congressman, but i reckon you’ll have to mortgage a
 part of the city itself to the brokers.”
 harry did not find that eagerness to lend money on stone’s landing in wall
 street which col. sellers had expected, (it had seen too many such maps as
 he exhibited), although his uncle and some of the brokers looked with more
 favor on the appropriation for improving the navigation of columbus river,
 and were not disinclined to form a company for that purpose. an
 appropriation was a tangible thing, if you could get hold of it, and it
 made little difference what it was appropriated for, so long as you got
 hold of it.
 pending these weighty negotiations, philip has persuaded harry to take a
 little run up to fallkill, a not difficult task, for that young man would
 at any time have turned his back upon all the land in the west at sight of
 a new and pretty face, and he had, it must be confessed, a facility in
 love making which made it not at all an interference with the more serious
 business of life. he could not, to be sure, conceive how philip could be
 interested in a young lady who was studying medicine, but he had no
 objection to going, for he did not doubt that there were other girls in
 fallkill who were worth a week’s attention.
 the young men were received at the house of the montagues with the
 hospitality which never failed there.
 “we are glad to see you again,” exclaimed the squire heartily, “you are
 welcome mr. brierly, any friend of phil’s is welcome at our house.”
 “it’s more like home to me, than any place except my own home,” cried
 philip, as he looked about the cheerful house and went through a general
 hand-shaking.
 “it’s a long time, though, since you have been here to say so,” alice
 said, with her father’s frankness of manner; “and i suspect we owe the
 visit now to your sudden interest in the fallkill seminary.”
 philip’s color came, as it had an awkward way of doing in his tell-tale
 face, but before he could stammer a reply, harry came in with,
 “that accounts for phil’s wish to build a seminary at stone’s landing, our
 place in missouri, when col. sellers insisted it should be a university.
 phil appears to have a weakness for seminaries.”
 “it would have been better for your friend sellers,” retorted philip, “if
 he had had a weakness for district schools. col. sellers, miss alice, is a
 great friend of harry’s, who is always trying to build a house by
 beginning at the top.”
 “i suppose it’s as easy to build a university on paper as a seminary, and
 it looks better,” was harry’s reflection; at which the squire laughed, and
 said he quite agreed with him. the old gentleman understood stone’s
 landing a good deal better than he would have done after an hour’s talk
 with either of it’s expectant proprietors.
 at this moment, and while philip was trying to frame a question that he
 found it exceedingly difficult to put into words, the door opened quietly,
 and ruth entered. taking in the group with a quick glance, her eye lighted
 up, and with a merry smile she advanced and shook hands with philip. she
 was so unconstrained and sincerely cordial, that it made that hero of the
 west feel somehow young, and very ill at ease.
 for months and months he had thought of this meeting and pictured it to
 himself a hundred times, but he had never imagined it would be like this.
 he should meet ruth unexpectedly, as she was walking alone from the
 school, perhaps, or entering the room where he was waiting for her, and
 she would cry “oh! phil,” and then check herself, and perhaps blush, and
 philip calm but eager and enthusiastic, would reassure her by his warm
 manner, and he would take her hand impressively, and she would look up
 timidly, and, after his long absence, perhaps he would be permitted to—
 good heavens, how many times he had come to this point, and wondered if it
 could happen so. well, well; he had never supposed that he should be the
 one embarrassed, and above all by a sincere and cordial welcome.
 “we heard you were at the sassacus house,” were ruth’s first words; “and
 this i suppose is your friend?”
 “i beg your pardon,” philip at length blundered out, “this is mr. brierly
 of whom i have written you.”
 and ruth welcomed harry with a friendliness that philip thought was due to
 his friend, to be sure, but which seemed to him too level with her
 reception of himself, but which harry received as his due from the other
 sex.
 questions were asked about the journey and about the west, and the
 conversation became a general one, until philip at length found himself
 talking with the squire in relation to land and railroads and things he
 couldn’t keep his mind on especially as he heard ruth and harry in an
 animated discourse, and caught the words “new york,” and “opera,” and
 “reception,” and knew that harry was giving his imagination full range in
 the world of fashion.
 harry knew all about the opera, green room and all (at least he said so)
 and knew a good many of the operas and could make very entertaining
 stories of their plots, telling how the soprano came in here, and the
 basso here, humming the beginning of their airs—tum-ti-tum-ti-ti—suggesting
 the profound dissatisfaction of the basso recitative—down-among-the-dead-men—and
 touching off the whole with an airy grace quite captivating; though he
 couldn’t have sung a single air through to save himself, and he hadn’t an
 ear to know whether it was sung correctly. all the same he doted on the
 opera, and kept a box there, into which he lounged occasionally to hear a
 favorite scene and meet his society friends.
 if ruth was ever in the city he should be happy to place his box at the
 disposal of ruth and her friends. needless to say that she was delighted
 with the offer.
 when she told philip of it, that discreet young fellow only smiled, and
 said that he hoped she would be fortunate enough to be in new york some
 evening when harry had not already given the use of his private box to
 some other friend.
 the squire pressed the visitors to let him send for their trunks and urged
 them to stay at his house, and alice joined in the invitation, but philip
 had reasons for declining. they staid to supper however, and in the
 evening philip had a long talk apart with ruth, a delightful hour to him,
 in which she spoke freely of herself as of old, of her studies at
 philadelphia and of her plans, and she entered into his adventures and
 prospects in the west with a genuine and almost sisterly interest; an
 interest, however, which did not exactly satisfy philip—it was too
 general and not personal enough to suit him. and with all her freedom in
 speaking of her own hopes, philip could not, detect any reference to
 himself in them; whereas he never undertook anything that he did not think
 of ruth in connection with it, he never made a plan that had not reference
 to her, and he never thought of anything as complete if she could not
 share it. fortune, reputation these had no value to him except in ruth’s
 eyes, and there were times when it seemed to him that if ruth was not on
 this earth, he should plunge off into some remote wilderness and live in a
 purposeless seclusion.
 “i hoped,” said philip; “to get a little start in connection with this new
 railroad, and make a little money, so that i could come east and engage in
 something more suited to my tastes. i shouldn’t like to live in the west.
 would you?
 “it never occurred to me whether i would or not,” was the unembarrassed
 reply. “one of our graduates went to chicago, and has a nice practice
 there. i don’t know where i shall go. it would mortify mother dreadfully
 to have me driving about philadelphia in a doctor’s gig.”
 philip laughed at the idea of it. “and does it seem as necessary to you to
 do it as it did before you came to fallkill?”
 it was a home question, and went deeper than philip knew, for ruth at once
 thought of practicing her profession among the young gentlemen and ladies
 of her acquaintance in the village; but she was reluctant to admit to
 herself that her notions of a career had undergone any change.
 “oh, i don’t think i should come to fallkill to practice, but i must do
 something when i am through school; and why not medicine?”
 philip would like to have explained why not, but the explanation would be
 of no use if it were not already obvious to ruth.
 harry was equally in his element whether instructing squire montague about
 the investment of capital in missouri, the improvement of columbus river,
 the project he and some gentlemen in new york had for making a shorter
 pacific connection with the mississippi than the present one; or diverting
 mrs. montague with his experience in cooking in camp; or drawing for miss
 alice an amusing picture of the social contrasts of new england and the
 border where he had been. harry was a very entertaining fellow, having his
 imagination to help his memory, and telling his stories as if he believed
 them—as perhaps he did. alice was greatly amused with harry and
 listened so seriously to his romancing that he exceeded his usual limits.
 chance allusions to his bachelor establishment in town and the place of
 his family on the hudson, could not have been made by a millionaire, more
 naturally.
 “i should think,” queried alice, “you would rather stay in new york than
 to try the rough life at the west you have been speaking of.”
 “oh, adventure,” says harry, “i get tired of new york. and besides i got
 involved in some operations that i had to see through. parties in new york
 only last week wanted me to go down into arizona in a big diamond
 interest. i told them, no, no speculation for me. i’ve got my interests in
 missouri; and i wouldn’t leave philip, as long as he stays there.”
 when the young gentlemen were on their way back to the hotel, mr. philip,
 who was not in very good humor, broke out,
 “what the deuce, harry, did you go on in that style to the montagues for?”
 “go on?” cried harry. “why shouldn’t i try to make a pleasant evening? and
 besides, ain’t i going to do those things? what difference does it make
 about the mood and tense of a mere verb? didn’t uncle tell me only last
 saturday, that i might as well go down to arizona and hunt for diamonds? a
 fellow might as well make a good impression as a poor one.”
 “nonsense. you’ll get to believing your own romancing by and by.”
 “well, you’ll see. when sellers and i get that appropriation, i’ll show
 you an establishment in town and another on the hudson and a box at the
 opera.”
 “yes, it will be like col. sellers’ plantation at hawkeye. did you ever
 see that?”
 “now, don’t be cross, phil. she’s just superb, that little woman. you
 never told me.”
 “who’s just superb?” growled philip, fancying this turn of the
 conversation less than the other.
 “well, mrs. montague, if you must know.” and harry stopped to light a
 cigar, and then puffed on in silence. the little quarrel didn’t last over
 night, for harry never appeared to cherish any ill-will half a second, and
 philip was too sensible to continue a row about nothing; and he had
 invited harry to come with him.
 the young gentlemen stayed in fallkill a week, and were every day at the
 montagues, and took part in the winter gaieties of the village. there were
 parties here and there to which the friends of ruth and the montagues were
 of course invited, and harry in the generosity of his nature, gave in
 return a little supper at the hotel, very simple indeed, with dancing in
 the hall, and some refreshments passed round. and philip found the whole
 thing in the bill when he came to pay it.
 before the week was over philip thought he had a new light on the
 character of ruth. her absorption in the small gaieties of the society
 there surprised him. he had few opportunities for serious conversation
 with her. there was always some butterfly or another flitting about, and
 when philip showed by his manner that he was not pleased, ruth laughed
 merrily enough and rallied him on his soberness—she declared he was
 getting to be grim and unsocial. he talked indeed more with alice than
 with ruth, and scarcely concealed from her the trouble that was in his
 mind. it needed, in fact, no word from him, for she saw clearly enough
 what was going forward, and knew her sex well enough to know there was no
 remedy for it but time.
 “ruth is a dear girl, philip, and has as much firmness of purpose as ever,
 but don’t you see she has just discovered that she is fond of society?
 don’t you let her see you are selfish about it, is my advice.”
 the last evening they were to spend in fallkill, they were at the
 montagues, and philip hoped that he would find ruth in a different mood.
 but she was never more gay, and there was a spice of mischief in her eye
 and in her laugh. “confound it,” said philip to himself, “she’s in a
 perfect twitter.”
 he would have liked to quarrel with her, and fling himself out of the
 house in tragedy style, going perhaps so far as to blindly wander off
 miles into the country and bathe his throbbing brow in the chilling rain
 of the stars, as people do in novels; but he had no opportunity. for ruth
 was as serenely unconscious of mischief as women can be at times, and
 fascinated him more than ever with her little demurenesses and
 half-confidences. she even said “thee” to him once in reproach for a
 cutting speech he began. and the sweet little word made his heart beat
 like a trip-hammer, for never in all her life had she said “thee” to him
 before.
 was she fascinated with harry’s careless ‘bon homie’ and gay assurance?
 both chatted away in high spirits, and made the evening whirl along in the
 most mirthful manner. ruth sang for harry, and that young gentleman turned
 the leaves for her at the piano, and put in a bass note now and then where
 he thought it would tell.
 yes, it was a merry evening, and philip was heartily glad when it was
 over, and the long leave-taking with the family was through with.
 “farewell philip. good night mr. brierly,” ruth’s clear voice sounded
 after them as they went down the walk.
 and she spoke harry’s name last, thought philip.
 “o see ye not yon narrow road so thick beset wi’ thorns and
 briers? that is the path of righteousness, though after it but
 few inquires. “and see ye not yon braid, braid road,
 that lies across the lily leven? that is the path of wickedness,
 though some call it the road to heaven." thomas the rhymer.
 phillip and harry reached new york in very different states of mind. harry
 was buoyant. he found a letter from col. sellers urging him to go to
 washington and confer with senator dilworthy. the petition was in his
 hands.
 it had been signed by everybody of any importance in missouri, and would
 be presented immediately.
 “i should go on myself,” wrote the colonel, “but i am engaged in the
 invention of a process for lighting such a city as st. louis by means of
 water; just attach my machine to the water-pipes anywhere and the
 decomposition of the fluid begins, and you will have floods of light for
 the mere cost of the machine. i’ve nearly got the lighting part, but i
 want to attach to it a heating, cooking, washing and ironing apparatus.
 it’s going to be the great thing, but we’d better keep this appropriation
 going while i am perfecting it.”
 harry took letters to several congressmen from his uncle and from mr. duff
 brown, each of whom had an extensive acquaintance in both houses where
 they were well known as men engaged in large private operations for the
 public good and men, besides, who, in the slang of the day, understood the
 virtues of “addition, division and silence.”
 senator dilworthy introduced the petition into the senate with the remark
 that he knew, personally, the signers of it, that they were men
 interested, it was true, in the improvement of the country, but he
 believed without any selfish motive, and that so far as he knew the
 signers were loyal. it pleased him to see upon the roll the names of many
 colored citizens, and it must rejoice every friend of humanity to know
 that this lately emancipated race were intelligently taking part in the
 development of the resources of their native land. he moved the reference
 of the petition to the proper committee.
 senator dilworthy introduced his young friend to influential members, as a
 person who was very well informed about the salt lick extension of the
 pacific, and was one of the engineers who had made a careful survey of
 columbus river; and left him to exhibit his maps and plans and to show the
 connection between the public treasury, the city of napoleon and
 legislation for the benefit off the whole country.
 harry was the guest of senator dilworthy. there was scarcely any good
 movement in which the senator was not interested. his house was open to
 all the laborers in the field of total abstinence, and much of his time
 was taken up in attending the meetings of this cause. he had a bible class
 in the sunday school of the church which he attended, and he suggested to
 harry that he might take a class during the time he remained in
 washington. mr. washington hawkins had a class. harry asked the senator if
 there was a class of young ladies for him to teach, and after that the
 senator did not press the subject.
 philip, if the truth must be told, was not well satisfied with his western
 prospects, nor altogether with the people he had fallen in with. the
 railroad contractors held out large but rather indefinite promises.
 opportunities for a fortune he did not doubt existed in missouri, but for
 himself he saw no better means for livelihood than the mastery of the
 profession he had rather thoughtlessly entered upon. during the summer he
 had made considerable practical advance in the science of engineering; he
 had been diligent, and made himself to a certain extent necessary to the
 work he was engaged on. the contractors called him into their
 consultations frequently, as to the character of the country he had been
 over, and the cost of constructing the road, the nature of the work, etc.
 still philip felt that if he was going to make either reputation or money
 as an engineer, he had a great deal of hard study before him, and it is to
 his credit that he did not shrink from it. while harry was in washington
 dancing attendance upon the national legislature and making the
 acquaintance of the vast lobby that encircled it, philip devoted himself
 day and night, with an energy and a concentration he was capable of, to
 the learning and theory of his profession, and to the science of railroad
 building. he wrote some papers at this time for the “plow, the loom and
 the anvil,” upon the strength of materials, and especially upon
 bridge-building, which attracted considerable attention, and were copied
 into the english “practical magazine.” they served at any rate to raise
 philip in the opinion of his friends the contractors, for practical men
 have a certain superstitious estimation of ability with the pen, and
 though they may a little despise the talent, they are quite ready to make
 use of it.
 philip sent copies of his performances to ruth’s father and to other
 gentlemen whose good opinion he coveted, but he did not rest upon his
 laurels. indeed, so diligently had he applied himself, that when it came
 time for him to return to the west, he felt himself, at least in theory,
 competent to take charge of a division in the field.
 the capital of the great republic was a new world to country-bred
 washington hawkins. st. louis was a greater city, but its floating
 population did not hail from great distances, and so it had the general
 family aspect of the permanent population; but washington gathered its
 people from the four winds of heaven, and so the manners, the faces and
 the fashions there, presented a variety that was infinite. washington had
 never been in “society” in st. louis, and he knew nothing of the ways of
 its wealthier citizens and had never inspected one of their dwellings.
 consequently, everything in the nature of modern fashion and grandeur was
 a new and wonderful revelation to him.
 washington is an interesting city to any of us. it seems to become more
 and more interesting the oftener we visit it. perhaps the reader has never
 been there? very well. you arrive either at night, rather too late to do
 anything or see anything until morning, or you arrive so early in the
 morning that you consider it best to go to your hotel and sleep an hour or
 two while the sun bothers along over the atlantic. you cannot well arrive
 at a pleasant intermediate hour, because the railway corporation that
 keeps the keys of the only door that leads into the town or out of it take
 care of that. you arrive in tolerably good spirits, because it is only
 thirty-eight miles from baltimore to the capital, and so you have only
 been insulted three times (provided you are not in a sleeping car—the
 average is higher there): once when you renewed your ticket after stopping
 over in baltimore; once when you were about to enter the “ladies’ car”
 without knowing it was a lady’s car; and once when you asked the conductor
 at what hour you would reach washington.
 you are assailed by a long rank of hackmen who shake their whips in your
 face as you step out upon the sidewalk; you enter what they regard as a
 “carriage,” in the capital, and you wonder why they do not take it out of
 service and put it in the museum: we have few enough antiquities, and it
 is little to our credit that we make scarcely any effort to preserve the
 few we have. 
 you reach your hotel, presently—and here let us draw the curtain of
 charity—because of course you have gone to the wrong one. you being
 a stranger, how could you do otherwise? there are a hundred and eighteen
 bad hotels, and only one good one. the most renowned and popular hotel of
 them all is perhaps the worst one known to history.
 it is winter, and night. when you arrived, it was snowing. when you
 reached the hotel, it was sleeting. when you went to bed, it was raining.
 during the night it froze hard, and the wind blew some chimneys down. when
 you got up in the morning, it was foggy. when you finished your breakfast
 at ten o’clock and went out, the sunshine was brilliant, the weather balmy
 and delicious, and the mud and slush deep and all-pervading. you will like
 the climate when you get used to it.
 you naturally wish to view the city; so you take an umbrella, an overcoat,
 and a fan, and go forth. the prominent features you soon locate and get
 familiar with; first you glimpse the ornamental upper works of a long,
 snowy palace projecting above a grove of trees, and a tall, graceful white
 dome with a statue on it surmounting the palace and pleasantly contrasting
 with the background of blue sky. that building is the capitol; gossips
 will tell you that by the original estimates it was to cost $,,,
 and that the government did come within $,, of building it for
 that sum.
 you stand at the back of the capitol to treat yourself to a view, and it
 is a very noble one. you understand, the capitol stands upon the verge of
 a high piece of table land, a fine commanding position, and its front
 looks out over this noble situation for a city—but it don’t see it,
 for the reason that when the capitol extension was decided upon, the
 property owners at once advanced their prices to such inhuman figures that
 the people went down and built the city in the muddy low marsh behind the
 temple of liberty; so now the lordly front of the building, with, its
 imposing colonades, its projecting graceful wings, its picturesque groups
 of statuary, and its long terraced ranges of steps, flowing down in white
 marble waves to the ground, merely looks out upon a sorrowful little
 desert of cheap boarding houses.
 so you observe, that you take your view from the back of the capitol. and
 yet not from the airy outlooks of the dome, by the way, because to get
 there you must pass through the great rotunda: and to do that, you would
 have to see the marvelous historical paintings that hang there, and the
 bas-reliefs—and what have you done that you should suffer thus? and
 besides, you might have to pass through the old part of the building, and
 you could not help seeing mr. lincoln, as petrified by a young lady artist
 for $,—and you might take his marble emancipation proclamation,
 which he holds out in his hand and contemplates, for a folded napkin; and
 you might conceive from his expression and his attitude, that he is
 finding fault with the washing. which is not the case. nobody knows what
 is the matter with him; but everybody feels for him. well, you ought not
 to go into the dome anyhow, because it would be utterly impossible to go
 up there without seeing the frescoes in it—and why should you be
 interested in the delirium tremens of art?
 the capitol is a very noble and a very beautiful building, both within and
 without, but you need not examine it now. still, if you greatly prefer
 going into the dome, go. now your general glance gives you picturesque
 stretches of gleaming water, on your left, with a sail here and there and
 a lunatic asylum on shore; over beyond the water, on a distant elevation,
 you see a squat yellow temple which your eye dwells upon lovingly through
 a blur of unmanly moisture, for it recalls your lost boyhood and the
 parthenons done in molasses candy which made it blest and beautiful. still
 in the distance, but on this side of the water and close to its edge, the
 monument to the father of his country towers out of the mud—sacred
 soil is the customary term. it has the aspect of a factory chimney with
 the top broken off. the skeleton of a decaying scaffolding lingers about
 its summit, and tradition says that the spirit of washington often comes
 down and sits on those rafters to enjoy this tribute of respect which the
 nation has reared as the symbol of its unappeasable gratitude. 
 the monument is to be finished, some day, and at that time our washington
 will have risen still higher in the nation’s veneration, and will be known
 as the great-great-grandfather of his country. the memorial chimney stands
 in a quiet pastoral locality that is full of reposeful expression. with a
 glass you can see the cow-sheds about its base, and the contented sheep
 nimbling pebbles in the desert solitudes that surround it, and the tired
 pigs dozing in the holy calm of its protecting shadow.
 now you wrench your gaze loose, and you look down in front of you and see
 the broad pennsylvania avenue stretching straight ahead for a mile or more
 till it brings up against the iron fence in front of a pillared granite
 pile, the treasury building-an edifice that would command respect in any
 capital. the stores and hotels that wall in this broad avenue are mean,
 and cheap, and dingy, and are better left without comment. beyond the
 treasury is a fine large white barn, with wide unhandsome grounds about
 it. the president lives there. it is ugly enough outside, but that is
 nothing to what it is inside. dreariness, flimsiness, bad taste reduced to
 mathematical completeness is what the inside offers to the eye, if it
 remains yet what it always has been.
 the front and right hand views give you the city at large. it is a wide
 stretch of cheap little brick houses, with here and there a noble
 architectural pile lifting itself out of the midst—government
 buildings, these. if the thaw is still going on when you come down and go
 about town, you will wonder at the short-sightedness of the city fathers,
 when you come to inspect the streets, in that they do not dilute the mud a
 little more and use them for canals.
 if you inquire around a little, you will find that there are more
 boardinghouses to the square acre in washington than there are in any
 other city in the land, perhaps. if you apply for a home in one of them,
 it will seem odd to you to have the landlady inspect you with a severe eye
 and then ask you if you are a member of congress. perhaps, just as a
 pleasantry, you will say yes. and then she will tell you that she is
 “full.” then you show her her advertisement in the morning paper, and
 there she stands, convicted and ashamed. she will try to blush, and it
 will be only polite in you to take the effort for the deed. she shows you
 her rooms, now, and lets you take one—but she makes you pay in
 advance for it. that is what you will get for pretending to be a member of
 congress. if you had been content to be merely a private citizen, your
 trunk would have been sufficient security for your board. if you are
 curious and inquire into this thing, the chances are that your landlady
 will be ill-natured enough to say that the person and property of a
 congressman are exempt from arrest or detention, and that with the tears
 in her eyes she has seen several of the people’s representatives walk off
 to their several states and territories carrying her unreceipted board
 bills in their pockets for keepsakes. and before you have been in
 washington many weeks you will be mean enough to believe her, too.
 of course you contrive to see everything and find out everything. and one
 of the first and most startling things you find out is, that every
 individual you encounter in the city of washington almost—and
 certainly every separate and distinct individual in the public employment,
 from the highest bureau chief, clear down to the maid who scrubs
 department halls, the night watchmen of the public buildings and the
 darkey boy who purifies the department spittoons—represents
 political influence. unless you can get the ear of a senator, or a
 congressman, or a chief of a bureau or department, and persuade him to use
 his “influence” in your behalf, you cannot get an employment of the most
 trivial nature in washington. mere merit, fitness and capability, are
 useless baggage to you without “influence.” the population of washington
 consists pretty much entirely of government employees and the people who
 board them. there are thousands of these employees, and they have gathered
 there from every corner of the union and got their berths through the
 intercession (command is nearer the word) of the senators and
 representatives of their respective states. it would be an odd
 circumstance to see a girl get employment at three or four dollars a week
 in one of the great public cribs without any political grandee to back
 her, but merely because she was worthy, and competent, and a good citizen
 of a free country that “treats all persons alike.” washington would be
 mildly thunderstruck at such a thing as that. if you are a member of
 congress, (no offence,) and one of your constituents who doesn’t know
 anything, and does not want to go into the bother of learning something,
 and has no money, and no employment, and can’t earn a living, comes
 besieging you for help, do you say, “come, my friend, if your services
 were valuable you could get employment elsewhere—don’t want you
 here?” oh, no: you take him to a department and say, “here, give this
 person something to pass away the time at—and a salary”—and
 the thing is done. you throw him on his country. he is his country’s
 child, let his country support him. there is something good and motherly
 about washington, the grand old benevolent national asylum for the
 helpless.
 the wages received by this great hive of employees are placed at the
 liberal figure meet and just for skilled and competent labor. such of them
 as are immediately employed about the two houses of congress, are not only
 liberally paid also, but are remembered in the customary extra
 compensation bill which slides neatly through, annually, with the general
 grab that signalizes the last night of a session, and thus twenty per
 cent. is added to their wages, for—for fun, no doubt.
 washington hawkins’ new life was an unceasing delight to him. senator
 dilworthy lived sumptuously, and washington’s quarters were charming—gas;
 running water, hot and cold; bath-room, coal-fires, rich carpets,
 beautiful pictures on the walls; books on religion, temperance, public
 charities and financial schemes; trim colored servants, dainty food—everything
 a body could wish for. and as for stationery, there was no end to it; the
 government furnished it; postage stamps were not needed—the
 senator’s frank could convey a horse through the mails, if necessary.
 and then he saw such dazzling company. renowned generals and admirals who
 had seemed but colossal myths when he was in the far west, went in and out
 before him or sat at the senator’s table, solidified into palpable flesh
 and blood; famous statesmen crossed his path daily; that once rare and
 awe-inspiring being, a congressman, was become a common spectacle—a
 spectacle so common, indeed, that he could contemplate it without
 excitement, even without embarrassment; foreign ministers were visible to
 the naked eye at happy intervals; he had looked upon the president
 himself, and lived. and more; this world of enchantment teemed with
 speculation—the whole atmosphere was thick with it—and that
 indeed was washington hawkins’ native air; none other refreshed his lungs
 so gratefully. he had found paradise at last.
 the more he saw of his chief the senator, the more he honored him, and the
 more conspicuously the moral grandeur of his character appeared to stand
 out. to possess the friendship and the kindly interest of such a man,
 washington said in a letter to louise, was a happy fortune for a young man
 whose career had been so impeded and so clouded as his.
 the weeks drifted by;—harry brierly flirted, danced, added lustre to
 the brilliant senatorial receptions, and diligently “buzzed” and
 “button-holed” congressmen in the interest of the columbus river scheme;
 meantime senator dilworthy labored hard in the same interest—and in
 others of equal national importance. harry wrote frequently to sellers,
 and always encouragingly; and from these letters it was easy to see that
 harry was a pet with all washington, and was likely to carry the thing
 through; that the assistance rendered him by “old dilworthy” was pretty
 fair—pretty fair; “and every little helps, you know,” said harry.
 washington wrote sellers officially, now and then. in one of his letters
 it appeared that whereas no member of the house committee favored the
 scheme at first, there was now needed but one more vote to compass a
 majority report. closing sentence:
 “providence seems to further our efforts." (signed,) “abner
 dilworthy, u. s. s., per washington hawkins, p. s."
 at the end of a week, washington was able to send the happy news,
 officially, as usual,—that the needed vote had been added and the
 bill favorably reported from the committee. other letters recorded its
 perils in committee of the whole, and by and by its victory, by just the
 skin of its teeth, on third reading and final passage. then came letters
 telling of mr. dilworthy’s struggles with a stubborn majority in his own
 committee in the senate; of how these gentlemen succumbed, one by one,
 till a majority was secured.
 then there was a hiatus. washington watched every move on the board, and
 he was in a good position to do this, for he was clerk of this committee,
 and also one other. he received no salary as private secretary, but these
 two clerkships, procured by his benefactor, paid him an aggregate of
 twelve dollars a day, without counting the twenty percent extra
 compensation which would of course be voted to him on the last night of
 the session.
 he saw the bill go into committee of the whole and struggle for its life
 again, and finally worry through. in the fullness of time he noted its
 second reading, and by and by the day arrived when the grand ordeal came,
 and it was put upon its final passage. washington listened with bated
 breath to the “aye!” “no!” “no!” “aye!” of the voters, for a few dread
 minutes, and then could bear the suspense no longer. he ran down from the
 gallery and hurried home to wait.
 at the end of two or three hours the senator arrived in the bosom of his
 family, and dinner was waiting. washington sprang forward, with the eager
 question on his lips, and the senator said:
 “we may rejoice freely, now, my son—providence has crowned our
 efforts with success.”
 washington sent grand good news to col. sellers that night. to louise he
 wrote:
 “it is beautiful to hear him talk when his heart is full of thankfulness
 for some manifestation of the divine favor. you shall know him, some day
 my louise, and knowing him you will honor him, as i do.”
 harry wrote:
 “i pulled it through, colonel, but it was a tough job, there is no
 question about that. there was not a friend to the measure in the house
 committee when i began, and not a friend in the senate committee except
 old dil himself, but they were all fixed for a majority report when i
 hauled off my forces. everybody here says you can’t get a thing like this
 through congress without buying committees for straight-out cash on
 delivery, but i think i’ve taught them a thing or two—if i could
 only make them believe it. when i tell the old residenters that this thing
 went through without buying a vote or making a promise, they say, ‘that’s
 rather too thin.’ and when i say thin or not thin it’s a fact, anyway,
 they say, ‘come, now, but do you really believe that?’ and when i say i
 don’t believe anything about it, i know it, they smile and say, ‘well, you
 are pretty innocent, or pretty blind, one or the other—there’s no
 getting around that.’ why they really do believe that votes have been
 bought—they do indeed. but let them keep on thinking so. i have
 found out that if a man knows how to talk to women, and has a little gift
 in the way of argument with men, he can afford to play for an
 appropriation against a money bag and give the money bag odds in the game.
 we’ve raked in $, of uncle sam’s money, say what they will—and
 there is more where this came from, when we want it, and i rather fancy i
 am the person that can go in and occupy it, too, if i do say it myself,
 that shouldn’t, perhaps. i’ll be with you within a week. scare up all the
 men you can, and put them to work at once. when i get there i propose to
 make things hum.”
 the great news lifted sellers into the clouds. he went to work on the
 instant. he flew hither and thither making contracts, engaging men, and
 steeping his soul in the ecstasies of business. he was the happiest man in
 missouri. and louise was the happiest woman; for presently came a letter
 from washington which said:
 “rejoice with me, for the long agony is over! we have waited patiently and
 faithfully, all these years, and now at last the reward is at hand. a man
 is to pay our family $, for the tennessee land! it is but a little
 sum compared to what we could get by waiting, but i do so long to see the
 day when i can call you my own, that i have said to myself, better take
 this and enjoy life in a humble way than wear out our best days in this
 miserable separation. besides, i can put this money into operations here
 that will increase it a hundred fold, yes, a thousand fold, in a few
 months. the air is full of such chances, and i know our family would
 consent in a moment that i should put in their shares with mine. without a
 doubt we shall be worth half a million dollars in a year from this time—i
 put it at the very lowest figure, because it is always best to be on the
 safe side—half a million at the very lowest calculation, and then
 your father will give his consent and we can marry at last. oh, that will
 be a glorious day. tell our friends the good news—i want all to
 share it.”
 and she did tell her father and mother, but they said, let it be kept
 still for the present. the careful father also told her to write
 washington and warn him not to speculate with the money, but to wait a
 little and advise with one or two wise old heads. she did this. and she
 managed to keep the good news to herself, though it would seem that the
 most careless observer might have seen by her springing step and her
 radiant countenance that some fine piece of good fortune had descended
 upon her.
 harry joined the colonel at stone’s landing, and that dead place sprang
 into sudden life. a swarm of men were hard at work, and the dull air was
 filled with the cheery music of labor. harry had been constituted
 engineer-in-general, and he threw the full strength of his powers into his
 work. he moved among his hirelings like a king. authority seemed to invest
 him with a new splendor. col. sellers, as general superintendent of a
 great public enterprise, was all that a mere human being could be—and
 more. these two grandees went at their imposing “improvement” with the air
 of men who had been charged with the work of altering the foundations of
 the globe.
 they turned their first attention to straightening the river just above
 the landing, where it made a deep bend, and where the maps and plans
 showed that the process of straightening would not only shorten distance
 but increase the “fall.” they started a cut-off canal across the peninsula
 formed by the bend, and such another tearing up of the earth and slopping
 around in the mud as followed the order to the men, had never been seen in
 that region before. there was such a panic among the turtles that at the
 end of six hours there was not one to be found within three miles of
 stone’s landing. they took the young and the aged, the decrepit and the
 sick upon their backs and left for tide-water in disorderly procession,
 the tadpoles following and the bull-frogs bringing up the rear.
 saturday night came, but the men were obliged to wait, because the
 appropriation had not come. harry said he had written to hurry up the
 money and it would be along presently. so the work continued, on monday.
 stone’s landing was making quite a stir in the vicinity, by this time.
 sellers threw a lot or two on the market, “as a feeler,” and they sold
 well. he re-clothed his family, laid in a good stock of provisions, and
 still had money left. he started a bank account, in a small way—and
 mentioned the deposit casually to friends; and to strangers, too; to
 everybody, in fact; but not as a new thing—on the contrary, as a
 matter of life-long standing. he could not keep from buying trifles every
 day that were not wholly necessary, it was such a gaudy thing to get out
 his bank-book and draw a check, instead of using his old customary
 formula, “charge it!” harry sold a lot or two, also—and had a dinner
 party or two at hawkeye and a general good time with the money. both men
 held on pretty strenuously for the coming big prices, however.
 at the end of a month things were looking bad. harry had besieged the new
 york headquarters of the columbus river slack-water navigation company
 with demands, then commands, and finally appeals, but to no purpose; the
 appropriation did not come; the letters were not even answered. the
 workmen were clamorous, now. the colonel and harry retired to consult.
 “what’s to be done?” said the colonel.
 “hang’d if i know.”
 “company say anything?”
 “not a word.”
 “you telegraphed yesterday?”
 “yes, and the day before, too.”
 “no answer?”
 “none-confound them!”
 then there was a long pause. finally both spoke at once:
 “i’ve got it!”
 “i’ve got it!”
 “what’s yours?” said harry.
 “give the boys thirty-day orders on the company for the back pay.”
 “that’s it-that’s my own idea to a dot. but then—but then——”
 “yes, i know,” said the colonel; “i know they can’t wait for the orders to
 go to new york and be cashed, but what’s the reason they can’t get them
 discounted in hawkeye?”
 “of course they can. that solves the difficulty. everybody knows the
 appropriation’s been made and the company’s perfectly good.”
 so the orders were given and the men appeased, though they grumbled a
 little at first. the orders went well enough for groceries and such things
 at a fair discount, and the work danced along gaily for a time. two or
 three purchasers put up frame houses at the landing and moved in, and of
 course a far-sighted but easy-going journeyman printer wandered along and
 started the “napoleon weekly telegraph and literary repository”—a
 paper with a latin motto from the unabridged dictionary, and plenty of
 “fat” conversational tales and double-leaded poetry—all for two
 dollars a year, strictly in advance. of course the merchants forwarded the
 orders at once to new york—and never heard of them again.
 at the end of some weeks harry’s orders were a drug in the market—nobody
 would take them at any discount whatever. the second month closed with a
 riot.—sellers was absent at the time, and harry began an active
 absence himself with the mob at his heels. but being on horseback, he had
 the advantage. he did not tarry in hawkeye, but went on, thus missing
 several appointments with creditors. he was far on his flight eastward,
 and well out of danger when the next morning dawned. he telegraphed the
 colonel to go down and quiet the laborers—he was bound east for
 money—everything would be right in a week—tell the men so—tell
 them to rely on him and not be afraid.
 sellers found the mob quiet enough when he reached the landing. they had
 gutted the navigation office, then piled the beautiful engraved
 stock-books and things in the middle of the floor and enjoyed the bonfire
 while it lasted. they had a liking for the colonel, but still they had
 some idea of hanging him, as a sort of make-shift that might answer, after
 a fashion, in place of more satisfactory game.
 but they made the mistake of waiting to hear what he had to say first.
 within fifteen minutes his tongue had done its work and they were all rich
 men.—he gave every one of them a lot in the suburbs of the city of
 stone’s landing, within a mile and a half of the future post office and
 railway station, and they promised to resume work as soon as harry got
 east and started the money along. now things were blooming and pleasant
 again, but the men had no money, and nothing to live on. the colonel
 divided with them the money he still had in bank—an act which had
 nothing surprising about it because he was generally ready to divide
 whatever he had with anybody that wanted it, and it was owing to this very
 trait that his family spent their days in poverty and at times were
 pinched with famine.
 when the men’s minds had cooled and sellers was gone, they hated
 themselves for letting him beguile them with fine speeches, but it was too
 late, now—they agreed to hang him another time—such time as
 providence should appoint.
 rumors of ruth’s frivolity and worldliness at fallkill traveled to
 philadelphia in due time, and occasioned no little undertalk among the
 bolton relatives.
 hannah shoecraft told another cousin that, for her part, she never
 believed that ruth had so much more “mind” than other people; and cousin
 hulda added that she always thought ruth was fond of admiration, and that
 was the reason she was unwilling to wear plain clothes and attend meeting.
 the story that ruth was “engaged” to a young gentleman of fortune in
 fallkill came with the other news, and helped to give point to the little
 satirical remarks that went round about ruth’s desire to be a doctor!
 margaret bolton was too wise to be either surprised or alarmed by these
 rumors. they might be true; she knew a woman’s nature too well to think
 them improbable, but she also knew how steadfast ruth was in her purposes,
 and that, as a brook breaks into ripples and eddies and dances and sports
 by the way, and yet keeps on to the sea, it was in ruth’s nature to give
 back cheerful answer to the solicitations of friendliness and pleasure, to
 appear idly delaying even, and sporting in the sunshine, while the current
 of her resolution flowed steadily on.
 that ruth had this delight in the mere surface play of life that she
 could, for instance, be interested in that somewhat serious by-play called
 “flirtation,” or take any delight in the exercise of those little arts of
 pleasing and winning which are none the less genuine and charming because
 they are not intellectual, ruth, herself, had never suspected until she
 went to fallkill. she had believed it her duty to subdue her gaiety of
 temperament, and let nothing divert her from what are called serious
 pursuits: in her limited experience she brought everything to the judgment
 of her own conscience, and settled the affairs of all the world in her own
 serene judgment hall. perhaps her mother saw this, and saw also that there
 was nothing in the friends’ society to prevent her from growing more and
 more opinionated.
 when ruth returned to philadelphia, it must be confessed—though it
 would not have been by her—that a medical career did seem a little
 less necessary for her than formerly; and coming back in a glow of
 triumph, as it were, and in the consciousness of the freedom and life in a
 lively society and in new and sympathetic friendship, she anticipated
 pleasure in an attempt to break up the stiffness and levelness of the
 society at home, and infusing into it something of the motion and sparkle
 which were so agreeable at fallkill. she expected visits from her new
 friends, she would have company, the new books and the periodicals about
 which all the world was talking, and, in short, she would have life.
 for a little while she lived in this atmosphere which she had brought with
 her. her mother was delighted with this change in her, with the
 improvement in her health and the interest she exhibited in home affairs.
 her father enjoyed the society of his favorite daughter as he did few
 things besides; he liked her mirthful and teasing ways, and not less a
 keen battle over something she had read. he had been a great reader all
 his life, and a remarkable memory had stored his mind with encyclopaedic
 information. it was one of ruth’s delights to cram herself with some out
 of the way subject and endeavor to catch her father; but she almost always
 failed. mr. bolton liked company, a house full of it, and the mirth of
 young people, and he would have willingly entered into any revolutionary
 plans ruth might have suggested in relation to friends’ society.
 but custom and the fixed order are stronger than the most enthusiastic and
 rebellious young lady, as ruth very soon found. in spite of all her brave
 efforts, her frequent correspondence, and her determined animation, her
 books and her music, she found herself settling into the clutches of the
 old monotony, and as she realized the hopelessness of her endeavors, the
 medical scheme took new hold of her, and seemed to her the only method of
 escape.
 “mother, thee does not know how different it is in fallkill, how much more
 interesting the people are one meets, how much more life there is.”
 “but thee will find the world, child, pretty much all the same, when thee
 knows it better. i thought once as thee does now, and had as little
 thought of being a friend as thee has. perhaps when thee has seen more,
 thee will better appreciate a quiet life.”
 “thee married young. i shall not marry young, and perhaps not at all,”
 said ruth, with a look of vast experience.
 “perhaps thee doesn’t know thee own mind; i have known persons of thy age
 who did not. did thee see anybody whom thee would like to live with always
 in fallkill?”
 “not always,” replied ruth with a little laugh. “mother, i think i
 wouldn’t say ‘always’ to any one until i have a profession and am as
 independent as he is. then my love would be a free act, and not in any way
 a necessity.”
 margaret bolton smiled at this new-fangled philosophy. “thee will find
 that love, ruth, is a thing thee won’t reason about, when it comes, nor
 make any bargains about. thee wrote that philip sterling was at fallkill.”
 “yes, and henry brierly, a friend of his; a very amusing young fellow and
 not so serious-minded as philip, but a bit of a fop maybe.”
 “and thee preferred the fop to the serious-minded?”
 “i didn’t prefer anybody; but henry brierly was good company, which philip
 wasn’t always.”
 “did thee know thee father had been in correspondence with philip?”
 ruth looked up surprised and with a plain question in her eyes.
 “oh, it’s not about thee.”
 “what then?” and if there was any shade of disappointment in her tone,
 probably ruth herself did not know it.
 “it’s about some land up in the country. that man bigler has got father
 into another speculation.”
 “that odious man! why will father have anything to do with him? is it that
 railroad?”
 “yes. father advanced money and took land as security, and whatever has
 gone with the money and the bonds, he has on his hands a large tract of
 wild land.”
 “and what has philip to do with that?”
 “it has good timber, if it could ever be got out, and father says that
 there must be coal in it; it’s in a coal region. he wants philip to survey
 it, and examine it for indications of coal.”
 “it’s another of father’s fortunes, i suppose,” said ruth. “he has put
 away so many fortunes for us that i’m afraid we never shall find them.”
 ruth was interested in it nevertheless, and perhaps mainly because philip
 was to be connected with the enterprise. mr. bigler came to dinner with
 her father next day, and talked a great deal about mr. bolton’s
 magnificent tract of land, extolled the sagacity that led him to secure
 such a property, and led the talk along to another railroad which would
 open a northern communication to this very land.
 “pennybacker says it’s full of coal, he’s no doubt of it, and a railroad
 to strike the erie would make it a fortune.”
 “suppose you take the land and work the thing up, mr. bigler; you may have
 the tract for three dollars an acre.”
 “you’d throw it away, then,” replied mr. bigler, “and i’m not the man to
 take advantage of a friend. but if you’ll put a mortgage on it for the
 northern road, i wouldn’t mind taking an interest, if pennybacker is
 willing; but pennybacker, you know, don’t go much on land, he sticks to
 the legislature.” and mr. bigler laughed.
 when mr. bigler had gone, ruth asked her father about philip’s connection
 with the land scheme.
 “there’s nothing definite,” said mr. bolton. “philip is showing aptitude
 for his profession. i hear the best reports of him in new york, though
 those sharpers don’t intend to do anything but use him. i’ve written and
 offered him employment in surveying and examining the land. we want to
 know what it is. and if there is anything in it that his enterprise can
 dig out, he shall have an interest. i should be glad to give the young
 fellow a lift.”
 all his life eli bolton had been giving young fellows a lift, and
 shouldering the loses when things turned out unfortunately. his ledger,
 take-it-altogether, would not show a balance on the right side; but
 perhaps the losses on his books will turn out to be credits in a world
 where accounts are kept on a different basis. the left hand of the ledger
 will appear the right, looked at from the other side.
 philip, wrote to ruth rather a comical account of the bursting up of the
 city of napoleon and the navigation improvement scheme, of harry’s flight
 and the colonel’s discomfiture. harry left in such a hurry that he hadn’t
 even time to bid miss laura hawkins good-bye, but he had no doubt that
 harry would console himself with the next pretty face he saw—a
 remark which was thrown in for ruth’s benefit. col. sellers had in all
 probability, by this time, some other equally brilliant speculation in his
 brain.
 as to the railroad, philip had made up his mind that it was merely kept on
 foot for speculative purposes in wall street, and he was about to quit it.
 would ruth be glad to hear, he wondered, that he was coming east? for he
 was coming, in spite of a letter from harry in new york, advising him to
 hold on until he had made some arrangements in regard to contracts, he to
 be a little careful about sellers, who was somewhat visionary, harry said.
 the summer went on without much excitement for ruth. she kept up a
 correspondence with alice, who promised a visit in the fall, she read, she
 earnestly tried to interest herself in home affairs and such people as
 came to the house; but she found herself falling more and more into
 reveries, and growing weary of things as they were. she felt that
 everybody might become in time like two relatives from a shaker
 establishment in ohio, who visited the boltons about this time, a father
 and son, clad exactly alike, and alike in manners. the son; however, who
 was not of age, was more unworldly and sanctimonious than his father; he
 always addressed his parent as “brother plum,” and bore himself,
 altogether in such a superior manner that ruth longed to put bent pins in
 his chair. both father and son wore the long, single breasted collarless
 coats of their society, without buttons, before or behind, but with a row
 of hooks and eyes on either side in front. it was ruth’s suggestion that
 the coats would be improved by a single hook and eye sewed on in the small
 of the back where the buttons usually are.
 amusing as this shaker caricature of the friends was, it oppressed ruth
 beyond measure; and increased her feeling of being stifled.
 it was a most unreasonable feeling. no home could be pleasanter than
 ruth’s. the house, a little out of the city; was one of those elegant
 country residences which so much charm visitors to the suburbs of
 philadelphia. a modern dwelling and luxurious in everything that wealth
 could suggest for comfort, it stood in the midst of exquisitely kept
 lawns, with groups of trees, parterres of flowers massed in colors, with
 greenhouse, grapery and garden; and on one side, the garden sloped away in
 undulations to a shallow brook that ran over a pebbly bottom and sang
 under forest trees. the country about was the perfection of cultivated
 landscape, dotted with cottages, and stately mansions of revolutionary
 date, and sweet as an english country-side, whether seen in the soft bloom
 of may or in the mellow ripeness of late october.
 it needed only the peace of the mind within, to make it a paradise. one
 riding by on the old germantown road, and seeing a young girl swinging in
 the hammock on the piazza and, intent upon some volume of old poetry or
 the latest novel, would no doubt have envied a life so idyllic. he could
 not have imagined that the young girl was reading a volume of reports of
 clinics and longing to be elsewhere.
 ruth could not have been more discontented if all the wealth about her had
 been as unsubstantial as a dream. perhaps she so thought it.
 “i feel,” she once said to her father, “as if i were living in a house of
 cards.”
 “and thee would like to turn it into a hospital?”
 “no. but tell me father,” continued ruth, not to be put off, “is thee
 still going on with that bigler and those other men who come here and
 entice thee?”
 mr. bolton smiled, as men do when they talk with women about “business”.
 “such men have their uses, ruth. they keep the world active, and i owe a
 great many of my best operations to such men. who knows, ruth, but this
 new land purchase, which i confess i yielded a little too much to bigler
 in, may not turn out a fortune for thee and the rest of the children?”
 “ah, father, thee sees every thing in a rose-colored light. i do believe
 thee wouldn’t have so readily allowed me to begin the study of medicine,
 if it hadn’t had the novelty of an experiment to thee.”
 “and is thee satisfied with it?”
 “if thee means, if i have had enough of it, no. i just begin to see what i
 can do in it, and what a noble profession it is for a woman. would thee
 have me sit here like a bird on a bough and wait for somebody to come and
 put me in a cage?”
 mr. bolton was not sorry to divert the talk from his own affairs, and he
 did not think it worth while to tell his family of a performance that very
 day which was entirely characteristic of him.
 ruth might well say that she felt as if she were living in a house of
 cards, although the bolton household had no idea of the number of perils
 that hovered over them, any more than thousands of families in america
 have of the business risks and contingences upon which their prosperity
 and luxury hang.
 a sudden call upon mr. bolton for a large sum of money, which must be
 forthcoming at once, had found him in the midst of a dozen ventures, from
 no one of which a dollar could be realized. it was in vain that he applied
 to his business acquaintances and friends; it was a period of sudden panic
 and no money. “a hundred thousand! mr. bolton,” said plumly. “good god, if
 you should ask me for ten, i shouldn’t know where to get it.”
 and yet that day mr. small (pennybacker, bigler and small) came to mr.
 bolton with a piteous story of ruin in a coal operation, if he could not
 raise ten thousand dollars. only ten, and he was sure of a fortune.
 without it he was a beggar. mr. bolton had already small’s notes for a
 large amount in his safe, labeled “doubtful;” he had helped him again and
 again, and always with the same result. but mr. small spoke with a
 faltering voice of his family, his daughter in school, his wife ignorant
 of his calamity, and drew such a picture of their agony, that mr. bolton
 put by his own more pressing necessity, and devoted the day to scraping
 together, here and there, ten thousand dollars for this brazen beggar, who
 had never kept a promise to him nor paid a debt.
 beautiful credit! the foundation of modern society. who shall say that
 this is not the golden age of mutual trust, of unlimited reliance upon
 human promises? that is a peculiar condition of society which enables a
 whole nation to instantly recognize point and meaning in the familiar
 newspaper anecdote, which puts into the mouth of a distinguished
 speculator in lands and mines this remark:—“i wasn’t worth a cent
 two years ago, and now i owe two millions of dollars.”
 it was a hard blow to poor sellers to see the work on his darling
 enterprise stop, and the noise and bustle and confusion that had been such
 refreshment to his soul, sicken and die out. it was hard to come down to
 humdrum ordinary life again after being a general superintendent and the
 most conspicuous man in the community. it was sad to see his name
 disappear from the newspapers; sadder still to see it resurrected at
 intervals, shorn of its aforetime gaudy gear of compliments and clothed on
 with rhetorical tar and feathers.
 but his friends suffered more on his account than he did. he was a cork
 that could not be kept under the water many moments at a time.
 he had to bolster up his wife’s spirits every now and then. on one of
 these occasions he said:
 “it’s all right, my dear, all right; it will all come right in a little
 while. there’s $, coming, and that will set things booming again:
 harry seems to be having some difficulty, but that’s to be expected—you
 can’t move these big operations to the tune of fisher’s hornpipe, you
 know. but harry will get it started along presently, and then you’ll see!
 i expect the news every day now.”
 “but beriah, you’ve been expecting it every day, all along, haven’t you?”
 “well, yes; yes—i don’t know but i have. but anyway, the longer it’s
 delayed, the nearer it grows to the time when it will start—same as
 every day you live brings you nearer to—nearer—”
 “the grave?”
 “well, no—not that exactly; but you can’t understand these things,
 polly dear—women haven’t much head for business, you know. you make
 yourself perfectly comfortable, old lady, and you’ll see how we’ll trot
 this right along. why bless you, let the appropriation lag, if it wants to—that’s
 no great matter—there’s a bigger thing than that.”
 “bigger than $,, beriah?”
 “bigger, child?—why, what’s $,? pocket money! mere pocket
 money! look at the railroad! did you forget the railroad? it ain’t many
 months till spring; it will be coming right along, and the railroad
 swimming right along behind it. where’ll it be by the middle of summer?
 just stop and fancy a moment—just think a little—don’t
 anything suggest itself? bless your heart, you dear women live right in
 the present all the time—but a man, why a man lives——
 “in the future, beriah? but don’t we live in the future most too much,
 beriah? we do somehow seem to manage to live on next year’s crop of corn
 and potatoes as a general thing while this year is still dragging along,
 but sometimes it’s not a robust diet,—beriah. but don’t look that
 way, dear—don’t mind what i say. i don’t mean to fret, i don’t mean
 to worry; and i don’t, once a month, do i, dear? but when i get a little
 low and feel bad, i get a bit troubled and worrisome, but it don’t mean
 anything in the world. it passes right away. i know you’re doing all you
 can, and i don’t want to seem repining and ungrateful—for i’m not,
 beriah—you know i’m not, don’t you?”
 “lord bless you, child, i know you are the very best little woman that
 ever lived—that ever lived on the whole face of the earth! and i
 know that i would be a dog not to work for you and think for you and
 scheme for you with all my might. and i’ll bring things all right yet,
 honey—cheer up and don’t you fear. the railroad——”
 “oh, i had forgotten the railroad, dear, but when a body gets blue, a body
 forgets everything. yes, the railroad—tell me about the railroad.”
 “aha, my girl, don’t you see? things ain’t so dark, are they? now i didn’t
 forget the railroad. now just think for a moment—just figure up a
 little on the future dead moral certainties. for instance, call this
 waiter st. louis.
 “and we’ll lay this fork (representing the railroad) from st. louis to
 this potato, which is slouchburg:
 “then with this carving knife we’ll continue the railroad from slouchburg
 to doodleville, shown by the black pepper:
 “then we run along the—yes—the comb—to the tumbler
 that’s brimstone:
 “thence by the pipe to belshazzar, which is the salt-cellar:
 “thence to, to—that quill—catfish—hand me the
 pincushion, marie antoinette:
 “thence right along these shears to this horse, babylon:
 “then by the spoon to bloody run—thank you, the ink:
 “thence to hail columbia—snuffers, polly, please move that cup and
 saucer close up, that’s hail columbia:
 “then—let me open my knife—to hark-from-the-tomb, where we’ll
 put the candle-stick—only a little distance from hail columbia to
 hark-from-the-tomb—down-grade all the way.
 “and there we strike columbus river—pass me two or three skeins of
 thread to stand for the river; the sugar bowl will do for hawkeye, and the
 rat trap for stone’s landing—napoleon, i mean—and you can see
 how much better napoleon is located than hawkeye. now here you are with
 your railroad complete, and showing its continuation to hallelujah and
 thence to corruptionville.
 “now then—there you are! it’s a beautiful road, beautiful. jeff
 thompson can out-engineer any civil engineer that ever sighted through an
 aneroid, or a theodolite, or whatever they call it—he calls it
 sometimes one and sometimes the other just whichever levels off his
 sentence neatest, i reckon. but ain’t it a ripping road, though? i tell
 you, it’ll make a stir when it gets along. just see what a country it goes
 through. there’s your onions at slouchburg—noblest onion country
 that graces god’s footstool; and there’s your turnip country all around
 doodleville—bless my life, what fortunes are going to be made there
 when they get that contrivance perfected for extracting olive oil out of
 turnips—if there’s any in them; and i reckon there is, because
 congress has made an appropriation of money to test the thing, and they
 wouldn’t have done that just on conjecture, of course. and now we come to
 the brimstone region—cattle raised there till you can’t rest—and
 corn, and all that sort of thing. then you’ve got a little stretch along
 through belshazzar that don’t produce anything now—at least nothing
 but rocks—but irrigation will fetch it. then from catfish to babylon
 it’s a little swampy, but there’s dead loads of peat down under there
 somewhere. next is the bloody run and hail columbia country—tobacco
 enough can be raised there to support two such railroads. next is the
 sassparilla region. i reckon there’s enough of that truck along in there
 on the line of the pocket-knife, from hail columbia to hark-from-the tomb
 to fat up all the consumptives in all the hospitals from halifax to the
 holy land. it just grows like weeds! i’ve got a little belt of sassparilla
 land in there just tucked away unobstrusively waiting for my little
 universal expectorant to get into shape in my head. and i’ll fix that, you
 know. one of these days i’ll have all the nations of the earth expecto—”
 “but beriah, dear—”
 “don’t interrupt me; polly—i don’t want you to lose the run of the
 map—well, take your toy-horse, james fitz-james, if you must have it—and
 run along with you. here, now—the soap will do for babylon. let me
 see—where was i? oh yes—now we run down to stone’s lan—napoleon—now
 we run down to napoleon. beautiful road. look at that, now. perfectly
 straight line-straight as the way to the grave.
 and see where it leaves hawkeye-clear out in the cold, my dear, clear out
 in the cold. that town’s as bound to die as—well if i owned it i’d
 get its obituary ready, now, and notify the mourners. polly, mark my words—in
 three years from this, hawkeye’ll be a howling wilderness. you’ll see. and
 just look at that river—noblest stream that meanders over the
 thirsty earth!—calmest, gentlest artery that refreshes her weary
 bosom! railroad goes all over it and all through it—wades right
 along on stilts. seventeen bridges in three miles and a half—forty-nine
 bridges from hark-from-the-tomb to stone’s landing altogether—forty
 nine bridges, and culverts enough to culvert creation itself! hadn’t
 skeins of thread enough to represent them all—but you get an idea—perfect
 trestle-work of bridges for seventy two miles: jeff thompson and i fixed
 all that, you know; he’s to get the contracts and i’m to put them through
 on the divide. just oceans of money in those bridges. it’s the only part
 of the railroad i’m interested in,—down along the line—and
 it’s all i want, too. it’s enough, i should judge. now here we are at
 napoleon. good enough country plenty good enough—all it wants is
 population. that’s all right—that will come. and it’s no bad country
 now for calmness and solitude, i can tell you—though there’s no
 money in that, of course. no money, but a man wants rest, a man wants
 peace—a man don’t want to rip and tear around all the time. and here
 we go, now, just as straight as a string for hallelujah—it’s a
 beautiful angle—handsome up grade all the way—and then away
 you go to corruptionville, the gaudiest country for early carrots and
 cauliflowers that ever—good missionary field, too. there ain’t such
 another missionary field outside the jungles of central africa. and
 patriotic?—why they named it after congress itself. oh, i warn you,
 my dear, there’s a good time coming, and it’ll be right along before you
 know what you’re about, too. that railroad’s fetching it. you see what it
 is as far as i’ve got, and if i had enough bottles and soap and boot-jacks
 and such things to carry it along to where it joins onto the union
 pacific, fourteen hundred miles from here, i should exhibit to you in that
 little internal improvement a spectacle of inconceivable sublimity. so,
 don’t you see? we’ve got the rail road to fall back on; and in the
 meantime, what are we worrying about that $, appropriation for?
 that’s all right. i’d be willing to bet anything that the very next letter
 that comes from harry will—”
 the eldest boy entered just in the nick of time and brought a letter, warm
 from the post-office.
 “things do look bright, after all, beriah. i’m sorry i was blue, but it
 did seem as if everything had been going against us for whole ages. open
 the letter—open it quick, and let’s know all about it before we stir
 out of our places. i am all in a fidget to know what it says.”
 the letter was opened, without any unnecessary delay.
 whatever may have been the language of harry’s letter to the colonel, the
 information it conveyed was condensed or expanded, one or the other, from
 the following episode of his visit to new york:
 he called, with official importance in his mien, at no.— wall
 street, where a great gilt sign betokened the presence of the
 head-quarters of the “columbus river slack-water navigation company.” he
 entered and gave a dressy porter his card, and was requested to wait a
 moment in a sort of ante-room. the porter returned in a minute; and asked
 whom he would like to see?
 “the president of the company, of course.”
 “he is busy with some gentlemen, sir; says he will be done with them
 directly.”
 that a copper-plate card with “engineer-in-chief” on it should be received
 with such tranquility as this, annoyed mr. brierly not a little. but he
 had to submit. indeed his annoyance had time to augment a good deal; for
 he was allowed to cool his heels a full half hour in the ante-room before
 those gentlemen emerged and he was ushered into the presence. he found a
 stately dignitary occupying a very official chair behind a long green
 morocco-covered table, in a room sumptuously carpeted and furnished, and
 well garnished with pictures.
 “good morning, sir; take a seat—take a seat.”
 “thank you sir,” said harry, throwing as much chill into his manner as his
 ruffled dignity prompted.
 “we perceive by your reports and the reports of the chief superintendent,
 that you have been making gratifying progress with the work.—we are
 all very much pleased.”
 “indeed? we did not discover it from your letters—which we have not
 received; nor by the treatment our drafts have met with—which were
 not honored; nor by the reception of any part of the appropriation, no
 part of it having come to hand.”
 “why, my dear mr. brierly, there must be some mistake, i am sure we wrote
 you and also mr. sellers, recently—when my clerk comes he will show
 copies—letters informing you of the ten per cent. assessment.”
 “oh, certainly, we got those letters. but what we wanted was money to
 carry on the work—money to pay the men.”
 “certainly, certainly—true enough—but we credited you both for
 a large part of your assessments—i am sure that was in our letters.”
 “of course that was in—i remember that.”
 “ah, very well then. now we begin to understand each other.”
 “well, i don’t see that we do. there’s two months’ wages due the men, and——”
 “how? haven’t you paid the men?”
 “paid them! how are we going to pay them when you don’t honor our drafts?”
 “why, my dear sir, i cannot see how you can find any fault with us. i am
 sure we have acted in a perfectly straight forward business way.—now
 let us look at the thing a moment. you subscribed for  shares of the
 capital stock, at $, a share, i believe?”
 “yes, sir, i did.”
 “and mr. sellers took a like amount?”
 “yes, sir.”
 “very well. no concern can get along without money. we levied a ten per
 cent. assessment. it was the original understanding that you and mr.
 sellers were to have the positions you now hold, with salaries of $ a
 month each, while in active service. you were duly elected to these
 places, and you accepted them. am i right?”
 “certainly.”
 “very well. you were given your instructions and put to work. by your
 reports it appears that you have expended the sum of $, upon the said
 work. two months salary to you two officers amounts altogether to $,—about
 one-eighth of your ten per cent. assessment, you see; which leaves you in
 debt to the company for the other seven-eighths of the assessment—viz,
 something over $, apiece. now instead of requiring you to forward this
 aggregate of $, or $, to new york, the company voted unanimously
 to let you pay it over to the contractors, laborers from time to time, and
 give you credit on the books for it. and they did it without a murmur,
 too, for they were pleased with the progress you had made, and were glad
 to pay you that little compliment—and a very neat one it was, too, i
 am sure. the work you did fell short of $,, a trifle. let me see—$,
 from $,—salary $, added—ah yes, the balance due the
 company from yourself and mr. sellers is $,, which i will take the
 responsibility of allowing to stand for the present, unless you prefer to
 draw a check now, and thus——”
 “confound it, do you mean to say that instead of the company owing us
 $,, we owe the company $,?”
 “well, yes.”
 “and that we owe the men and the contractors nearly ten thousand dollars
 besides?”
 “owe them! oh bless my soul, you can’t mean that you have not paid these
 people?”
 “but i do mean it!”
 the president rose and walked the floor like a man in bodily pain. his
 brows contracted, he put his hand up and clasped his forehead, and kept
 saying, “oh, it is, too bad, too bad, too bad! oh, it is bound to be found
 out—nothing can prevent it—nothing!”
 then he threw himself into his chair and said:
 “my dear mr. brierson, this is dreadful—perfectly dreadful. it will
 be found out. it is bound to tarnish the good name of the company; our
 credit will be seriously, most seriously impaired. how could you be so
 thoughtless—the men ought to have been paid though it beggared us
 all!”
 “they ought, ought they? then why the devil—my name is not bryerson,
 by the way—why the mischief didn’t the compa—why what in the
 nation ever became of the appropriation? where is that appropriation?—if
 a stockholder may make so bold as to ask.”
 “the appropriation?—that paltry $,, do you mean?”
 “of course—but i didn’t know that $, was so very paltry.
 though i grant, of course, that it is not a large sum, strictly speaking.
 but where is it?”
 “my dear sir, you surprise me. you surely cannot have had a large
 acquaintance with this sort of thing. otherwise you would not have
 expected much of a result from a mere initial appropriation like that. it
 was never intended for anything but a mere nest egg for the future and
 real appropriations to cluster around.”
 “indeed? well, was it a myth, or was it a reality? whatever become of it?”
 “why the—matter is simple enough. a congressional appropriation
 costs money. just reflect, for instance—a majority of the house
 committee, say $, apiece—$,; a majority of the senate
 committee, the same each—say $,; a little extra to one or two
 chairman of one or two such committees, say $, each—$,;
 and there’s $, of the money gone, to begin with. then, seven male
 lobbyists, at $, each—$,; one female lobbyist, $,; a
 high moral congressman or senator here and there—the high moral ones
 cost more, because they. give tone to a measure—say ten of these at
 $, each, is $,; then a lot of small-fry country members who won’t
 vote for anything whatever without pay—say twenty at $ apiece, is
 $,; a lot of dinners to members—say $, altogether; lot of
 jimcracks for congressmen’s wives and children—those go a long way—you
 can’t spend too much money in that line—well, those things cost in a
 lump, say $,—along there somewhere; and then comes your printed
 documents—your maps, your tinted engravings, your pamphlets, your
 illuminated show cards, your advertisements in a hundred and fifty papers
 at ever so much a line—because you’ve got to keep the papers all
 right or you are gone up, you know. oh, my dear sir, printing bills are
 destruction itself. ours so far amount to—let me see—; ;
 ; ;—and then there’s ; ; —well, never mind the
 details, the total in clean numbers foots up $,. thus far!”
 “what!”
 “oh, yes indeed. printing’s no bagatelle, i can tell you. and then there’s
 your contributions, as a company, to chicago fires and boston fires, and
 orphan asylums and all that sort of thing—head the list, you see,
 with the company’s full name and a thousand dollars set opposite—great
 card, sir—one of the finest advertisements in the world—the
 preachers mention it in the pulpit when it’s a religious charity—one
 of the happiest advertisements in the world is your benevolent donation.
 ours have amounted to sixteen thousand dollars and some cents up to this
 time.”
 “good heavens!”
 “oh, yes. perhaps the biggest thing we’ve done in the advertising line was
 to get an officer of the u. s. government, of perfectly himmalayan
 official altitude, to write up our little internal improvement for a
 religious paper of enormous circulation—i tell you that makes our
 bonds go handsomely among the pious poor. your religious paper is by far
 the best vehicle for a thing of this kind, because they’ll ‘lead’ your
 article and put it right in the midst of the reading matter; and if it’s
 got a few scripture quotations in it, and some temperance platitudes and a
 bit of gush here and there about sunday schools, and a sentimental snuffle
 now and then about ‘god’s precious ones, the honest hard-handed poor,’ it
 works the nation like a charm, my dear sir, and never a man suspects that
 it is an advertisement; but your secular paper sticks you right into the
 advertising columns and of course you don’t take a trick. give me a
 religious paper to advertise in, every time; and if you’ll just look at
 their advertising pages, you’ll observe that other people think a good
 deal as i do—especially people who have got little financial schemes
 to make everybody rich with. of course i mean your great big metropolitan
 religious papers that know how to serve god and make money at the same
 time—that’s your sort, sir, that’s your sort—a religious paper
 that isn’t run to make money is no use to us, sir, as an advertising
 medium—no use to anybody—in our line of business. i guess our
 next best dodge was sending a pleasure trip of newspaper reporters out to
 napoleon. never paid them a cent; just filled them up with champagne and
 the fat of the land, put pen, ink and paper before them while they were
 red-hot, and bless your soul when you come to read their letters you’d
 have supposed they’d been to heaven. and if a sentimental squeamishness
 held one or two of them back from taking a less rosy view of napoleon, our
 hospitalities tied his tongue, at least, and he said nothing at all and so
 did us no harm. let me see—have i stated all the expenses i’ve been
 at? no, i was near forgetting one or two items. there’s your official
 salaries—you can’t get good men for nothing. salaries cost pretty
 lively. and then there’s your big high-sounding millionaire names stuck
 into your advertisements as stockholders—another card, that—and
 they are stockholders, too, but you have to give them the stock and
 non-assessable at that—so they’re an expensive lot. very, very
 expensive thing, take it all around, is a big internal improvement concern—but
 you see that yourself, mr. bryerman—you see that, yourself, sir.”
 “but look here. i think you are a little mistaken about it’s ever having
 cost anything for congressional votes. i happen to know something about
 that. i’ve let you say your say—now let me say mine. i don’t wish to
 seem to throw any suspicion on anybody’s statements, because we are all
 liable to be mistaken. but how would it strike you if i were to say that i
 was in washington all the time this bill was pending? and what if i added
 that i put the measure through myself? yes, sir, i did that little thing.
 and moreover, i never paid a dollar for any man’s vote and never promised
 one. there are some ways of doing a thing that are as good as others which
 other people don’t happen to think about, or don’t have the knack of
 succeeding in, if they do happen to think of them. my dear sir, i am
 obliged to knock some of your expenses in the head—for never a cent
 was paid a congressman or senator on the part of this navigation company.”
 the president smiled blandly, even sweetly, all through this harangue, and
 then said:
 “is that so?”
 “every word of it.”
 “well it does seem to alter the complexion of things a little. you are
 acquainted with the members down there, of course, else you could not have
 worked to such advantage?”
 “i know them all, sir. i know their wives, their children, their babies—i
 even made it a point to be on good terms with their lackeys. i know every
 congressman well—even familiarly.”
 “very good. do you know any of their signatures? do you know their
 handwriting?”
 “why i know their handwriting as well as i know my own—have had
 correspondence enough with them, i should think. and their signatures—why
 i can tell their initials, even.”
 the president went to a private safe, unlocked it and got out some letters
 and certain slips of paper. then he said:
 “now here, for instance; do you believe that that is a genuine letter? do
 you know this signature here?—and this one? do you know who those
 initials represent—and are they forgeries?”
 harry was stupefied. there were things there that made his brain swim.
 presently, at the bottom of one of the letters he saw a signature that
 restored his equilibrium; it even brought the sunshine of a smile to his
 face.
 the president said:
 “that one amuses you. you never suspected him?”
 “of course i ought to have suspected him, but i don’t believe it ever
 really occurred to me. well, well, well—how did you ever have the
 nerve to approach him, of all others?”
 “why my friend, we never think of accomplishing anything without his help.
 he is our mainstay. but how do those letters strike you?”
 “they strike me dumb! what a stone-blind idiot i have been!”
 “well, take it all around, i suppose you had a pleasant time in
 washington,” said the president, gathering up the letters; “of course you
 must have had. very few men could go there and get a money bill through
 without buying a single—”
 “come, now, mr. president, that’s plenty of that! i take back everything i
 said on that head. i’m a wiser man to-day than i was yesterday, i can tell
 you.”
 “i think you are. in fact i am satisfied you are. but now i showed you
 these things in confidence, you understand. mention facts as much as you
 want to, but don’t mention names to anybody. i can depend on you for that,
 can’t i?”
 “oh, of course. i understand the necessity of that. i will not betray the
 names. but to go back a bit, it begins to look as if you never saw any of
 that appropriation at all?”
 “we saw nearly ten thousand dollars of it—and that was all. several
 of us took turns at log-rolling in washington, and if we had charged
 anything for that service, none of that $, would ever have reached
 new york.”
 “if you hadn’t levied the assessment you would have been in a close place
 i judge?”
 “close? have you figured up the total of the disbursements i told you of?”
 “no, i didn’t think of that.”
 “well, lets see:
 spent in washington, say,
 printing, advertising, etc, say
 charity, say,
 total,
 the money to do that with, comes from—
 appropriation,
 ten per cent assessment on capital of
 total,
 “which leaves us in debt some $, at this moment. salaries of home
 officers are still going on; also printing and advertising. next month
 will show a state of things!”
 “and then—burst up, i suppose?”
 “by no means. levy another assessment”
 “oh, i see. that’s dismal.”
 “by no means.”
 “why isn’t it? what’s the road out?”
 “another appropriation, don’t you see?”
 “bother the appropriations. they cost more than they come to.”
 “not the next one. we’ll call for half a million—get it and go for a
 million the very next month.”
 “yes, but the cost of it!”
 the president smiled, and patted his secret letters affectionately. he
 said:
 “all these people are in the next congress. we shan’t have to pay them a
 cent. and what is more, they will work like beavers for us—perhaps
 it might be to their advantage.”
 harry reflected profoundly a while. then he said:
 “we send many missionaries to lift up the benighted races of other lands.
 how much cheaper and better it would be if those people could only come
 here and drink of our civilization at its fountain head.”
 “i perfectly agree with you, mr. beverly. must you go? well, good morning.
 look in, when you are passing; and whenever i can give you any information
 about our affairs and prospects, i shall be glad to do it.”
 harry’s letter was not a long one, but it contained at least the
 calamitous figures that came out in the above conversation. the colonel
 found himself in a rather uncomfortable place—no $, salary
 forthcoming; and himself held responsible for half of the $, due the
 workmen, to say nothing of being in debt to the company to the extent of
 nearly $,. polly’s heart was nearly broken; the “blues” returned in
 fearful force, and she had to go out of the room to hide the tears that
 nothing could keep back now.
 there was mourning in another quarter, too, for louise had a letter.
 washington had refused, at the last moment, to take $, for the
 tennessee land, and had demanded $,! so the trade fell through, and
 now washington was wailing because he had been so foolish. but he wrote
 that his man might probably return to the city soon, and then he meant to
 sell to him, sure, even if he had to take $,. louise had a good cry—several
 of them, indeed—and the family charitably forebore to make any
 comments that would increase her grief.
 spring blossomed, summer came, dragged its hot weeks by, and the colonel’s
 spirits rose, day by day, for the railroad was making good progress. but
 by and by something happened. hawkeye had always declined to subscribe
 anything toward the railway, imagining that her large business would be a
 sufficient compulsory influence; but now hawkeye was frightened; and
 before col. sellers knew what he was about, hawkeye, in a panic, had
 rushed to the front and subscribed such a sum that napoleon’s attractions
 suddenly sank into insignificance and the railroad concluded to follow a
 comparatively straight coarse instead of going miles out of its way to
 build up a metropolis in the muddy desert of stone’s landing.
 the thunderbolt fell. after all the colonel’s deep planning; after all his
 brain work and tongue work in drawing public attention to his pet project
 and enlisting interest in it; after all his faithful hard toil with his
 hands, and running hither and thither on his busy feet; after all his high
 hopes and splendid prophecies, the fates had turned their backs on him at
 last, and all in a moment his air-castles crumbled to ruins about him.
 hawkeye rose from her fright triumphant and rejoicing, and down went
 stone’s landing! one by one its meagre parcel of inhabitants packed up and
 moved away, as the summer waned and fall approached. town lots were no
 longer salable, traffic ceased, a deadly lethargy fell upon the place once
 more, the “weekly telegraph” faded into an early grave, the wary tadpole
 returned from exile, the bullfrog resumed his ancient song, the tranquil
 turtle sunned his back upon bank and log and drowsed his grateful life
 away as in the old sweet days of yore.
 philip sterling was on his way to ilium, in the state of pennsylvania.
 ilium was the railway station nearest to the tract of wild land which mr.
 bolton had commissioned him to examine.
 on the last day of the journey as the railway train philip was on was
 leaving a large city, a lady timidly entered the drawing-room car, and
 hesitatingly took a chair that was at the moment unoccupied. philip saw
 from the window that a gentleman had put her upon the car just as it was
 starting. in a few moments the conductor entered, and without waiting an
 explanation, said roughly to the lady,
 “now you can’t sit there. that seat’s taken. go into the other car.”
 “i did not intend to take the seat,” said the lady rising, “i only sat
 down a moment till the conductor should come and give me a seat.”
 “there aint any. car’s full. you’ll have to leave.”
 “but, sir,” said the lady, appealingly, “i thought—”
 “can’t help what you thought—you must go into the other car.”
 “the train is going very fast, let me stand here till we stop.”
 “the lady can have my seat,” cried philip, springing up.
 the conductor turned towards philip, and coolly and deliberately surveyed
 him from head to foot, with contempt in every line of his face, turned his
 back upon him without a word, and said to the lady,
 “come, i’ve got no time to talk. you must go now.”
 the lady, entirely disconcerted by such rudeness, and frightened, moved
 towards the door, opened it and stepped out. the train was swinging along
 at a rapid rate, jarring from side to side; the step was a long one
 between the cars and there was no protecting grating. the lady attempted
 it, but lost her balance, in the wind and the motion of the car, and fell!
 she would inevitably have gone down under the wheels, if philip, who had
 swiftly followed her, had not caught her arm and drawn her up. he then
 assisted her across, found her a seat, received her bewildered thanks, and
 returned to his car.
 the conductor was still there, taking his tickets, and growling something
 about imposition. philip marched up to him, and burst out with,
 “you are a brute, an infernal brute, to treat a woman that way.”
 “perhaps you’d like to make a fuss about it,” sneered the conductor.
 philip’s reply was a blow, given so suddenly and planted so squarely in
 the conductor’s face, that it sent him reeling over a fat passenger, who
 was looking up in mild wonder that any one should dare to dispute with a
 conductor, and against the side of the car.
 he recovered himself, reached the bell rope, “damn you, i’ll learn you,”
 stepped to the door and called a couple of brakemen, and then, as the
 speed slackened; roared out,
 “get off this train.”
 “i shall not get off. i have as much right here as you.”
 “we’ll see,” said the conductor, advancing with the brakemen. the
 passengers protested, and some of them said to each other, “that’s too
 bad,” as they always do in such cases, but none of them offered to take a
 hand with philip. the men seized him, wrenched him from his seat, dragged
 him along the aisle, tearing his clothes, thrust him from the car, and,
 then flung his carpet-bag, overcoat and umbrella after him. and the train
 went on.
 the conductor, red in the face and puffing from his exertion, swaggered
 through the car, muttering “puppy, i’ll learn him.” the passengers, when
 he had gone, were loud in their indignation, and talked about signing a
 protest, but they did nothing more than talk.
 the next morning the hooverville patriot and clarion had this “item”:—
 “we learn that as the down noon express was leaving h——
 yesterday a lady! (god save the mark) attempted to force herself into
 the already full palatial car. conductor slum, who is too old a bird to
 be caught with chaff, courteously informed her that the car was full,
 and when she insisted on remaining, he persuaded her to go into the car
 where she belonged. thereupon a young sprig, from the east, blustered
 like a shanghai rooster, and began to sass the conductor with his chin
 music. that gentleman delivered the young aspirant for a muss one of his
 elegant little left-handers, which so astonished him that he began to
 feel for his shooter. whereupon mr. slum gently raised the youth,
 carried him forth, and set him down just outside the car to cool off.
 whether the young blood has yet made his way out of bascom’s swamp, we
 have not learned. conductor slum is one of the most gentlemanly and
 efficient officers on the road; but he ain’t trifled with, not much. we
 learn that the company have put a new engine on the seven o’clock train,
 and newly upholstered the drawing-room car throughout. it spares no
 effort for the comfort of the traveling public.”
 philip never had been before in bascom’s swamp, and there was nothing
 inviting in it to detain him. after the train got out of the way he
 crawled out of the briars and the mud, and got upon the track. he was
 somewhat bruised, but he was too angry to mind that. he plodded along over
 the ties in a very hot condition of mind and body. in the scuffle, his
 railway check had disappeared, and he grimly wondered, as he noticed the
 loss, if the company would permit him to walk over their track if they
 should know he hadn’t a ticket.
 philip had to walk some five miles before he reached a little station,
 where he could wait for a train, and he had ample time for reflection. at
 first he was full of vengeance on the company. he would sue it. he would
 make it pay roundly. but then it occurred to him that he did not know the
 name of a witness he could summon, and that a personal fight against a
 railway corporation was about the most hopeless in the world. he then
 thought he would seek out that conductor, lie in wait for him at some
 station, and thrash him, or get thrashed himself.
 but as he got cooler, that did not seem to him a project worthy of a
 gentleman exactly. was it possible for a gentleman to get even with such a
 fellow as that conductor on the letter’s own plane? and when he came to
 this point, he began to ask himself, if he had not acted very much like a
 fool. he didn’t regret striking the fellow—he hoped he had left a
 mark on him. but, after all, was that the best way? here was he, philip
 sterling, calling himself a gentleman, in a brawl with a vulgar conductor,
 about a woman he had never seen before. why should he have put himself in
 such a ridiculous position? wasn’t it enough to have offered the lady his
 seat, to have rescued her from an accident, perhaps from death? suppose he
 had simply said to the conductor, “sir, your conduct is brutal, i shall
 report you.” the passengers, who saw the affair, might have joined in a
 report against the conductor, and he might really have accomplished
 something. and, now! philip looked at his torn clothes, and thought with
 disgust of his haste in getting into a fight with such an autocrat.
 at the little station where philip waited for the next train, he met a man—who
 turned out to be a justice of the peace in that neighborhood, and told him
 his adventure. he was a kindly sort of man, and seemed very much
 interested.
 “dum ’em,” said he, when he had heard the story.
 “do you think any thing can be done, sir?”
 “wal, i guess tain’t no use. i hain’t a mite of doubt of every word you
 say. but suin’s no use. the railroad company owns all these people along
 here, and the judges on the bench too. spiled your clothes! wal, ‘least
 said’s soonest mended.’ you haint no chance with the company.”
 when next morning, he read the humorous account in the patriot and
 clarion, he saw still more clearly what chance he would have had before
 the public in a fight with the railroad company.
 still philip’s conscience told him that it was his plain duty to carry the
 matter into the courts, even with the certainty of defeat. he confessed
 that neither he nor any citizen had a right to consult his own feelings or
 conscience in a case where a law of the land had been violated before his
 own eyes. he confessed that every citizen’s first duty in such case is to
 put aside his own business and devote his time and his best efforts to
 seeing that the infraction is promptly punished; and he knew that no
 country can be well governed unless its citizens as a body keep
 religiously before their minds that they are the guardians of the law, and
 that the law officers are only the machinery for its execution, nothing
 more. as a finality he was obliged to confess that he was a bad citizen,
 and also that the general laxity of the time, and the absence of a sense
 of duty toward any part of the community but the individual himself were
 ingrained in him, and he was no better than the rest of the people.
 the result of this little adventure was that philip did not reach ilium
 till daylight the next morning, when he descended sleepy and sore, from a
 way train, and looked about him. ilium was in a narrow mountain gorge,
 through which a rapid stream ran. it consisted of the plank platform on
 which he stood, a wooden house, half painted, with a dirty piazza
 (unroofed) in front, and a sign board hung on a slanting pole—bearing
 the legend, “hotel. p. dusenheimer,” a sawmill further down the stream, a
 blacksmith-shop, and a store, and three or four unpainted dwellings of the
 slab variety.
 as philip approached the hotel he saw what appeared to be a wild beast
 crouching on the piazza. it did not stir, however, and he soon found that
 it was only a stuffed skin. this cheerful invitation to the tavern was the
 remains of a huge panther which had been killed in the region a few weeks
 before. philip examined his ugly visage and strong crooked fore-arm, as he
 was waiting admittance, having pounded upon the door.
 “yait a bit. i’ll shoost—put on my trowsers,” shouted a voice from
 the window, and the door was soon opened by the yawning landlord.
 “morgen! didn’t hear d’ drain oncet. dem boys geeps me up zo spate. gom
 right in.”
 philip was shown into a dirty bar-room. it was a small room, with a stove
 in the middle, set in a long shallow box of sand, for the benefit of the
 “spitters,” a bar across one end—a mere counter with a sliding
 glass-case behind it containing a few bottles having ambitious labels, and
 a wash-sink in one corner. on the walls were the bright yellow and black
 handbills of a traveling circus, with pictures of acrobats in human
 pyramids, horses flying in long leaps through the air, and sylph-like
 women in a paradisaic costume, balancing themselves upon the tips of their
 toes on the bare backs of frantic and plunging steeds, and kissing their
 hands to the spectators meanwhile.
 as philip did not desire a room at that hour, he was invited to wash
 himself at the nasty sink, a feat somewhat easier than drying his face,
 for the towel that hung in a roller over the sink was evidently as much a
 fixture as the sink itself, and belonged, like the suspended brush and
 comb, to the traveling public. philip managed to complete his toilet by
 the use of his pocket-handkerchief, and declining the hospitality of the
 landlord, implied in the remark, “you won’d dake notin’?” he went into the
 open air to wait for breakfast.
 the country he saw was wild but not picturesque. the mountain before him
 might be eight hundred feet high, and was only a portion of a long
 unbroken range, savagely wooded, which followed the stream. behind the
 hotel, and across the brawling brook, was another level-topped, wooded
 range exactly like it. ilium itself, seen at a glance, was old enough to
 be dilapidated, and if it had gained anything by being made a wood and
 water station of the new railroad, it was only a new sort of grime and
 rawness. p. dusenheimer, standing in the door of his uninviting groggery,
 when the trains stopped for water; never received from the traveling
 public any patronage except facetious remarks upon his personal
 appearance. perhaps a thousand times he had heard the remark, “ilium
 fuit,” followed in most instances by a hail to himself as “aeneas,” with
 the inquiry “where is old anchises?” at first he had replied, “dere ain’t
 no such man;” but irritated by its senseless repetition, he had latterly
 dropped into the formula of, “you be dam.”
 philip was recalled from the contemplation of ilium by the rolling and
 growling of the gong within the hotel, the din and clamor increasing till
 the house was apparently unable to contain it; when it burst out of the
 front door and informed the world that breakfast was on the table.
 the dining room was long, low and narrow, and a narrow table extended its
 whole length. upon this was spread a cloth which from appearance might
 have been as long in use as the towel in the barroom. upon the table was
 the usual service, the heavy, much nicked stone ware, the row of plated
 and rusty castors, the sugar bowls with the zinc tea-spoons sticking up in
 them, the piles of yellow biscuits, the discouraged-looking plates of
 butter. the landlord waited, and philip was pleased to observe the change
 in his manner. in the barroom he was the conciliatory landlord. standing
 behind his guests at table, he had an air of peremptory patronage, and the
 voice in which he shot out the inquiry, as he seized philip’s plate,
 “beefsteak or liver?” quite took away philip’s power of choice. he begged
 for a glass of milk, after trying that green hued compound called coffee,
 and made his breakfast out of that and some hard crackers which seemed to
 have been imported into ilium before the introduction of the iron horse,
 and to have withstood a ten years siege of regular boarders, greeks and
 others.
 the land that philip had come to look at was at least five miles distant
 from ilium station. a corner of it touched the railroad, but the rest was
 pretty much an unbroken wilderness, eight or ten thousand acres of rough
 country, most of it such a mountain range as he saw at ilium.
 his first step was to hire three woodsmen to accompany him. by their help
 he built a log hut, and established a camp on the land, and then began his
 explorations, mapping down his survey as he went along, noting the timber,
 and the lay of the land, and making superficial observations as to the
 prospect of coal.
 the landlord at ilium endeavored to persuade philip to hire the services
 of a witch-hazel professor of that region, who could walk over the land
 with his wand and tell him infallibly whether it contained coal, and
 exactly where the strata ran. but philip preferred to trust to his own
 study of the country, and his knowledge of the geological formation. he
 spent a month in traveling over the land and making calculations; and made
 up his mind that a fine vein of coal ran through the mountain about a mile
 from the railroad, and that the place to run in a tunnel was half way
 towards its summit.
 acting with his usual promptness, philip, with the consent of mr. bolton,
 broke ground there at once, and, before snow came, had some rude buildings
 up, and was ready for active operations in the spring. it was true that
 there were no outcroppings of coal at the place, and the people at ilium
 said he “mought as well dig for plug terbaccer there;” but philip had
 great faith in the uniformity of nature’s operations in ages past, and he
 had no doubt that he should strike at this spot the rich vein that had
 made the fortune of the golden briar company.
 once more louise had good news from her washington—senator dilworthy
 was going to sell the tennessee land to the government! louise told laura
 in confidence. she had told her parents, too, and also several bosom
 friends; but all of these people had simply looked sad when they heard the
 news, except laura. laura’s face suddenly brightened under it—only
 for an instant, it is true, but poor louise was grateful for even that
 fleeting ray of encouragement. when next laura was alone, she fell into a
 train of thought something like this:
 “if the senator has really taken hold of this matter, i may look for that
 invitation to his house at any moment. i am perishing to go! i do long to
 know whether i am only simply a large-sized pigmy among these pigmies
 here, who tumble over so easily when one strikes them, or whether i am
 really—.” her thoughts drifted into other channels, for a season.
 then she continued:—“he said i could be useful in the great cause of
 philanthropy, and help in the blessed work of uplifting the poor and the
 ignorant, if he found it feasible to take hold of our land. well, that is
 neither here nor there; what i want, is to go to washington and find out
 what i am. i want money, too; and if one may judge by what she hears,
 there are chances there for a—.” for a fascinating woman, she was
 going to say, perhaps, but she did not.
 along in the fall the invitation came, sure enough. it came officially
 through brother washington, the private secretary, who appended a
 postscript that was brimming with delight over the prospect of seeing the
 duchess again. he said it would be happiness enough to look upon her face
 once more—it would be almost too much happiness when to it was added
 the fact that she would bring messages with her that were fresh from
 louise’s lips.
 in washington’s letter were several important enclosures. for instance,
 there was the senator’s check for $,—“to buy suitable clothing
 in new york with!” it was a loan to be refunded when the land was sold.
 two thousand—this was fine indeed. louise’s father was called rich,
 but laura doubted if louise had ever had $ worth of new clothing at one
 time in her life. with the check came two through tickets—good on
 the railroad from hawkeye to washington via new york—and they were
 “dead-head” tickets, too, which had been given to senator dilworthy by the
 railway companies. senators and representatives were paid thousands of
 dollars by the government for traveling expenses, but they always traveled
 “deadhead” both ways, and then did as any honorable, high-minded men would
 naturally do—declined to receive the mileage tendered them by the
 government. the senator had plenty of railway passes, and could easily
 spare two to laura—one for herself and one for a male escort.
 washington suggested that she get some old friend of the family to come
 with her, and said the senator would “deadhead” him home again as soon as
 he had grown tired of the sights of the capital. laura thought the thing
 over. at first she was pleased with the idea, but presently she began to
 feel differently about it. finally she said, “no, our staid, steady-going
 hawkeye friends’ notions and mine differ about some things—they
 respect me, now, and i respect them—better leave it so—i will
 go alone; i am not afraid to travel by myself.” and so communing with
 herself, she left the house for an afternoon walk.
 almost at the door she met col. sellers. she told him about her invitation
 to washington.
 “bless me!” said the colonel. “i have about made up my mind to go there
 myself. you see we’ve got to get another appropriation through, and the
 company want me to come east and put it through congress. harry’s there,
 and he’ll do what he can, of course; and harry’s a good fellow and always
 does the very best he knows how, but then he’s young—rather young
 for some parts of such work, you know—and besides he talks too much,
 talks a good deal too much; and sometimes he appears to be a little bit
 visionary, too, i think the worst thing in the world for a business man. a
 man like that always exposes his cards, sooner or later. this sort of
 thing wants an old, quiet, steady hand—wants an old cool head, you
 know, that knows men, through and through, and is used to large
 operations. i’m expecting my salary, and also some dividends from the
 company, and if they get along in time, i’ll go along with you laura—take
 you under my wing—you mustn’t travel alone. lord i wish i had the
 money right now. —but there’ll be plenty soon—plenty.”
 laura reasoned with herself that if the kindly, simple-hearted colonel was
 going anyhow, what could she gain by traveling alone and throwing away his
 company? so she told him she accepted his offer gladly, gratefully. she
 said it would be the greatest of favors if he would go with her and
 protect her—not at his own expense as far as railway fares were
 concerned, of course; she could not expect him to put himself to so much
 trouble for her and pay his fare besides. but he wouldn’t hear of her
 paying his fare—it would be only a pleasure to him to serve her.
 laura insisted on furnishing the tickets; and finally, when argument
 failed, she said the tickets cost neither her nor any one else a cent—she
 had two of them—she needed but one—and if he would not take
 the other she would not go with him. that settled the matter. he took the
 ticket. laura was glad that she had the check for new clothing, for she
 felt very certain of being able to get the colonel to borrow a little of
 the money to pay hotel bills with, here and there.
 she wrote washington to look for her and col. sellers toward the end of
 november; and at about the time set the two travelers arrived safe in the
 capital of the nation, sure enough.
 she, the gracious lady, yet no paines did spare to doe him
 ease, or doe him remedy: many restoratives of vertues rare and
 costly cordialles she did apply, to mitigate his stubborne malady.
 spenser’s faerie queens.
 mr. henry brierly was exceedingly busy in new york, so he wrote col.
 sellers, but he would drop everything and go to washington.
 the colonel believed that harry was the prince of lobbyists, a little too
 sanguine, may be, and given to speculation, but, then, he knew everybody;
 the columbus river navigation scheme was got through almost entirely by
 his aid. he was needed now to help through another scheme, a benevolent
 scheme in which col. sellers, through the hawkinses, had a deep interest.
 “i don’t care, you know,” he wrote to harry, “so much about the niggroes.
 but if the government will buy this land, it will set up the hawkins
 family—make laura an heiress—and i shouldn’t wonder if beriah
 sellers would set up his carriage again. dilworthy looks at it different,
 of course. he’s all for philanthropy, for benefiting the colored race.
 there’s old balsam, was in the interior—used to be the rev. orson
 balsam of iowa—he’s made the riffle on the injun; great injun
 pacificator and land dealer. balaam’a got the injun to himself, and i
 suppose that senator dilworthy feels that there is nothing left him but
 the colored man. i do reckon he is the best friend the colored man has got
 in washington.”
 though harry was in a hurry to reach washington, he stopped in
 philadelphia; and prolonged his visit day after day, greatly to the
 detriment of his business both in new york and washington. the society at
 the bolton’s might have been a valid excuse for neglecting business much
 more important than his. philip was there; he was a partner with mr.
 bolton now in the new coal venture, concerning which there was much to be
 arranged in preparation for the spring work, and philip lingered week
 after week in the hospitable house. alice was making a winter visit. ruth
 only went to town twice a week to attend lectures, and the household was
 quite to mr. bolton’s taste, for he liked the cheer of company and
 something going on evenings. harry was cordially asked to bring his
 traveling-bag there, and he did not need urging to do so. not even the
 thought of seeing laura at the capital made him restless in the society of
 the two young ladies; two birds in hand are worth one in the bush
 certainly.
 philip was at home—he sometimes wished he were not so much so. he
 felt that too much or not enough was taken for granted. ruth had met him,
 when he first came, with a cordial frankness, and her manner continued
 entirely unrestrained. she neither sought his company nor avoided it, and
 this perfectly level treatment irritated him more than any other could
 have done. it was impossible to advance much in love-making with one who
 offered no obstacles, had no concealments and no embarrassments, and whom
 any approach to sentimentality would be quite likely to set into a fit of
 laughter.
 “why, phil,” she would say, “what puts you in the dumps to day? you are as
 solemn as the upper bench in meeting. i shall have to call alice to raise
 your spirits; my presence seems to depress you.”
 “it’s not your presence, but your absence when you are present,” began
 philip, dolefully, with the idea that he was saying a rather deep thing.
 “but you won’t understand me.”
 “no, i confess i cannot. if you really are so low, as to think i am absent
 when i am present, it’s a frightful case of aberration; i shall ask father
 to bring out dr. jackson. does alice appear to be present when she is
 absent?”
 “alice has some human feeling, anyway. she cares for something besides
 musty books and dry bones. i think, ruth, when i die,” said philip,
 intending to be very grim and sarcastic, “i’ll leave you my skeleton. you
 might like that.”
 “it might be more cheerful than you are at times,” ruth replied with a
 laugh. “but you mustn’t do it without consulting alice. she might not like
 it.”
 “i don’t know why you should bring alice up on every occasion. do you
 think i am in love with her?”
 “bless you, no. it never entered my head. are you? the thought of philip
 sterling in love is too comical. i thought you were only in love with the
 ilium coal mine, which you and father talk about half the time.”
 this is a specimen of philip’s wooing. confound the girl, he would say to
 himself, why does she never tease harry and that young shepley who comes
 here?
 how differently alice treated him. she at least never mocked him, and it
 was a relief to talk with one who had some sympathy with him. and he did
 talk to her, by the hour, about ruth. the blundering fellow poured all his
 doubts and anxieties into her ear, as if she had been the impassive
 occupant of one of those little wooden confessionals in the cathedral on
 logan square. has a confessor, if she is young and pretty, any feeling?
 does it mend the matter by calling her your sister?
 philip called alice his good sister, and talked to her about love and
 marriage, meaning ruth, as if sisters could by no possibility have any
 personal concern in such things. did ruth ever speak of him? did she think
 ruth cared for him? did ruth care for anybody at fallkill? did she care
 for anything except her profession? and so on.
 alice was loyal to ruth, and if she knew anything she did not betray her
 friend. she did not, at any rate, give philip too much encouragement. what
 woman, under the circumstances, would?
 “i can tell you one thing, philip,” she said, “if ever ruth bolton loves,
 it will be with her whole soul, in a depth of passion that will sweep
 everything before it and surprise even herself.”
 a remark that did not much console philip, who imagined that only some
 grand heroism could unlock the sweetness of such a heart; and philip
 feared that he wasn’t a hero. he did not know out of what materials a
 woman can construct a hero, when she is in the creative mood.
 harry skipped into this society with his usual lightness and gaiety. his
 good nature was inexhaustible, and though he liked to relate his own
 exploits, he had a little tact in adapting himself to the tastes of his
 hearers. he was not long in finding out that alice liked to hear about
 philip, and harry launched out into the career of his friend in the west,
 with a prodigality of invention that would have astonished the chief
 actor. he was the most generous fellow in the world, and picturesque
 conversation was the one thing in which he never was bankrupt. with mr.
 bolton he was the serious man of business, enjoying the confidence of many
 of the monied men in new york, whom mr. bolton knew, and engaged with them
 in railway schemes and government contracts. philip, who had so long known
 harry, never could make up his mind that harry did not himself believe
 that he was a chief actor in all these large operations of which he talked
 so much.
 harry did not neglect to endeavor to make himself agreeable to mrs.
 bolton, by paying great attention to the children, and by professing the
 warmest interest in the friends’ faith. it always seemed to him the most
 peaceful religion; he thought it must be much easier to live by an
 internal light than by a lot of outward rules; he had a dear quaker aunt
 in providence of whom mrs. bolton constantly reminded him. he insisted
 upon going with mrs. bolton and the children to the friends meeting on
 first day, when ruth and alice and philip, “world’s people,” went to a
 church in town, and he sat through the hour of silence with his hat on, in
 most exemplary patience. in short, this amazing actor succeeded so well
 with mrs. bolton, that she said to philip one day,
 “thy friend, henry brierly, appears to be a very worldly minded young man.
 does he believe in anything?”
 “oh, yes,” said philip laughing, “he believes in more things than any
 other person i ever saw.”
 to ruth, harry seemed to be very congenial. he was never moody for one
 thing, but lent himself with alacrity to whatever her fancy was. he was
 gay or grave as the need might be. no one apparently could enter more
 fully into her plans for an independent career.
 “my father,” said harry, “was bred a physician, and practiced a little
 before he went into wall street. i always had a leaning to the study.
 there was a skeleton hanging in the closet of my father’s study when i was
 a boy, that i used to dress up in old clothes. oh, i got quite familiar
 with the human frame.”
 “you must have,” said philip. “was that where you learned to play the
 bones? he is a master of those musical instruments, ruth; he plays well
 enough to go on the stage.”
 “philip hates science of any kind, and steady application,” retorted
 harry. he didn’t fancy philip’s banter, and when the latter had gone out,
 and ruth asked,
 “why don’t you take up medicine, mr. brierly?”
 harry said, “i have it in mind. i believe i would begin attending lectures
 this winter if it weren’t for being wanted in washington. but medicine is
 particularly women’s province.”
 “why so?” asked ruth, rather amused.
 “well, the treatment of disease is a good deal a matter of sympathy. a
 woman’s intuition is better than a man’s. nobody knows anything, really,
 you know, and a woman can guess a good deal nearer than a man.”
 “you are very complimentary to my sex.”
 “but,” said harry frankly; “i should want to choose my doctor; an ugly
 woman would ruin me, the disease would be sure to strike in and kill me at
 sight of her. i think a pretty physician, with engaging manners, would
 coax a fellow to live through almost anything.”
 “i am afraid you are a scoffer, mr. brierly.”
 “on the contrary, i am quite sincere. wasn’t it old what’s his name that
 said only the beautiful is useful?”
 whether ruth was anything more than diverted with harry’s company, philip
 could not determine. he scorned at any rate to advance his own interest by
 any disparaging communications about harry, both because he could not help
 liking the fellow himself, and because he may have known that he could not
 more surely create a sympathy for him in ruth’s mind. that ruth was in no
 danger of any serious impression he felt pretty sure, felt certain of it
 when he reflected upon her severe occupation with her profession. hang it,
 he would say to himself, she is nothing but pure intellect anyway. and he
 only felt uncertain of it when she was in one of her moods of raillery,
 with mocking mischief in her eyes. at such times she seemed to prefer
 harry’s society to his. when philip was miserable about this, he always
 took refuge with alice, who was never moody, and who generally laughed him
 out of his sentimental nonsense. he felt at his ease with alice, and was
 never in want of something to talk about; and he could not account for the
 fact that he was so often dull with ruth, with whom, of all persons in the
 world, he wanted to appear at his best.
 harry was entirely satisfied with his own situation. a bird of passage is
 always at its ease, having no house to build, and no responsibility. he
 talked freely with philip about ruth, an almighty fine girl, he said, but
 what the deuce she wanted to study medicine for, he couldn’t see.
 there was a concert one night at the musical fund hall and the four had
 arranged to go in and return by the germantown cars. it was philip’s plan,
 who had engaged the seats, and promised himself an evening with ruth,
 walking with her, sitting by her in the hall, and enjoying the feeling of
 protecting that a man always has of a woman in a public place. he was fond
 of music, too, in a sympathetic way; at least, he knew that ruth’s delight
 in it would be enough for him.
 perhaps he meant to take advantage of the occasion to say some very
 serious things. his love for ruth was no secret to mrs. bolton, and he
 felt almost sure that he should have no opposition in the family. mrs.
 bolton had been cautious in what she said, but philip inferred everything
 from her reply to his own questions, one day, “has thee ever spoken thy
 mind to ruth?”
 why shouldn’t he speak his mind, and end his doubts? ruth had been more
 tricksy than usual that day, and in a flow of spirits quite inconsistent,
 it would seem, in a young lady devoted to grave studies.
 had ruth a premonition of philip’s intention, in his manner? it may be,
 for when the girls came down stairs, ready to walk to the cars; and met
 philip and harry in the hall, ruth said, laughing,
 “the two tallest must walk together” and before philip knew how it
 happened ruth had taken harry’s arm, and his evening was spoiled. he had
 too much politeness and good sense and kindness to show in his manner that
 he was hit. so he said to harry,
 “that’s your disadvantage in being short.” and he gave alice no reason to
 feel during the evening that she would not have been his first choice for
 the excursion. but he was none the less chagrined, and not a little angry
 at the turn the affair took.
 the hall was crowded with the fashion of the town. the concert was one of
 those fragmentary drearinesses that people endure because they are
 fashionable; tours de force on the piano, and fragments from operas, which
 have no meaning without the setting, with weary pauses of waiting between;
 there is the comic basso who is so amusing and on such familiar terms with
 the audience, and always sings the barber; the attitudinizing tenor, with
 his languishing “oh, summer night;” the soprano with her “batti batti,”
 who warbles and trills and runs and fetches her breath, and ends with a
 noble scream that brings down a tempest of applause in the midst of which
 she backs off the stage smiling and bowing. it was this sort of concert,
 and philip was thinking that it was the most stupid one he ever sat
 through, when just as the soprano was in the midst of that touching
 ballad, “comin’ thro’ the rye” (the soprano always sings “comin’ thro’ the
 rye” on an encore)—the black swan used to make it irresistible,
 philip remembered, with her arch, “if a body kiss a body” there was a cry
 of “fire!”
 the hall is long and narrow, and there is only one place of egress.
 instantly the audience was on its feet, and a rush began for the door. men
 shouted, women screamed, and panic seized the swaying mass. a second’s
 thought would have convinced every one that getting out was impossible,
 and that the only effect of a rush would be to crash people to death. but
 a second’s thought was not given. a few cried:
 “sit down, sit down,” but the mass was turned towards the door. women were
 down and trampled on in the aisles, and stout men, utterly lost to
 self-control, were mounting the benches, as if to run a race over the mass
 to the entrance.
 philip who had forced the girls to keep their seats saw, in a flash, the
 new danger, and sprang to avert it. in a second more those infuriated men
 would be over the benches and crushing ruth and alice under their boots.
 he leaped upon the bench in front of them and struck out before him with
 all his might, felling one man who was rushing on him, and checking for an
 instant the movement, or rather parting it, and causing it to flow on
 either side of him. but it was only for an instant; the pressure behind
 was too great, and, the next philip was dashed backwards over the seat.
 and yet that instant of arrest had probably saved the girls, for as philip
 fell, the orchestra struck up “yankee doodle” in the liveliest manner. the
 familiar tune caught the ear of the mass, which paused in wonder, and gave
 the conductor’s voice a chance to be heard—“it’s a false alarm!”
 the tumult was over in a minute, and the next, laughter was heard, and not
 a few said, “i knew it wasn’t anything.” “what fools people are at such a
 time.”
 the concert was over, however. a good many people were hurt, some of them
 seriously, and among them philip sterling was found bent across the seat,
 insensible, with his left arm hanging limp and a bleeding wound on his
 head.
 when he was carried into the air he revived, and said it was nothing. a
 surgeon was called, and it was thought best to drive at once to the
 bolton’s, the surgeon supporting philip, who did not speak the whole way.
 his arm was set and his head dressed, and the surgeon said he would come
 round all right in his mind by morning; he was very weak. alice who was
 not much frightened while the panic lasted in the hall, was very much
 unnerved by seeing philip so pale and bloody. ruth assisted the surgeon
 with the utmost coolness and with skillful hands helped to dress philip’s
 wounds. and there was a certain intentness and fierce energy in what she
 did that might have revealed something to philip if he had been in his
 senses.
 but he was not, or he would not have murmured “let alice do it, she is not
 too tall.”
 it was ruth’s first case.
 washington’s delight in his beautiful sister was measureless. he said that
 she had always been the queenliest creature in the land, but that she was
 only commonplace before, compared to what she was now, so extraordinary
 was the improvement wrought by rich fashionable attire.
 “but your criticisms are too full of brotherly partiality to be depended
 on, washington. other people will judge differently.”
 “indeed they won’t. you’ll see. there will never be a woman in washington
 that can compare with you. you’ll be famous within a fortnight, laura.
 everybody will want to know you. you wait—you’ll see.”
 laura wished in her heart that the prophecy might come true; and privately
 she even believed it might—for she had brought all the women whom
 she had seen since she left home under sharp inspection, and the result
 had not been unsatisfactory to her.
 during a week or two washington drove about the city every day with her
 and familiarized her with all of its salient features. she was beginning
 to feel very much at home with the town itself, and she was also fast
 acquiring ease with the distinguished people she met at the dilworthy
 table, and losing what little of country timidity she had brought with her
 from hawkeye. she noticed with secret pleasure the little start of
 admiration that always manifested itself in the faces of the guests when
 she entered the drawing-room arrayed in evening costume: she took
 comforting note of the fact that these guests directed a very liberal
 share of their conversation toward her; she observed with surprise, that
 famous statesmen and soldiers did not talk like gods, as a general thing,
 but said rather commonplace things for the most part; and she was filled
 with gratification to discover that she, on the contrary, was making a
 good many shrewd speeches and now and then a really brilliant one, and
 furthermore, that they were beginning to be repeated in social circles
 about the town.
 congress began its sittings, and every day or two washington escorted her
 to the galleries set apart for lady members of the households of senators
 and representatives. here was a larger field and a wider competition, but
 still she saw that many eyes were uplifted toward her face, and that first
 one person and then another called a neighbor’s attention to her; she was
 not too dull to perceive that the speeches of some of the younger
 statesmen were delivered about as much and perhaps more at her than to the
 presiding officer; and she was not sorry to see that the dapper young
 senator from iowa came at once and stood in the open space before the
 president’s desk to exhibit his feet as soon as she entered the gallery,
 whereas she had early learned from common report that his usual custom was
 to prop them on his desk and enjoy them himself with a selfish disregard
 of other people’s longings.
 invitations began to flow in upon her and soon she was fairly “in
 society.” “the season” was now in full bloom, and the first select
 reception was at hand—that is to say, a reception confined to invited
 guests. senator dilworthy had become well convinced, by this time, that
 his judgment of the country-bred missouri girl had not deceived him—it
 was plain that she was going to be a peerless missionary in the field of
 labor he designed her for, and therefore it would be perfectly safe and
 likewise judicious to send her forth well panoplied for her work.—so
 he had added new and still richer costumes to her wardrobe, and assisted
 their attractions with costly jewelry—loans on the future land sale.
 this first select reception took place at a cabinet minister’s—or
 rather a cabinet secretary’s mansion. when laura and the senator arrived,
 about half past nine or ten in the evening, the place was already pretty
 well crowded, and the white-gloved negro servant at the door was still
 receiving streams of guests.—the drawing-rooms were brilliant with
 gaslight, and as hot as ovens. the host and hostess stood just within the
 door of entrance; laura was presented, and then she passed on into the
 maelstrom of be-jeweled and richly attired low-necked ladies and
 white-kid-gloved and steel pen-coated gentlemen and wherever she moved she
 was followed by a buzz of admiration that was grateful to all her senses—so
 grateful, indeed, that her white face was tinged and its beauty heightened
 by a perceptible suffusion of color. she caught such remarks as, “who is
 she?” “superb woman!” “that is the new beauty from the west,” etc., etc.
 whenever she halted, she was presently surrounded by ministers, generals,
 congressmen, and all manner of aristocratic people. introductions
 followed, and then the usual original question, “how do you like
 washington, miss hawkins?” supplemented by that other usual original
 question, “is this your first visit?”
 these two exciting topics being exhausted, conversation generally drifted
 into calmer channels, only to be interrupted at frequent intervals by new
 introductions and new inquiries as to how laura liked the capital and
 whether it was her first visit or not. and thus for an hour or more the
 duchess moved through the crush in a rapture of happiness, for her doubts
 were dead and gone, now she knew she could conquer here. a familiar face
 appeared in the midst of the multitude and harry brierly fought his
 difficult way to her side, his eyes shouting their gratification, so to
 speak:
 “oh, this is a happiness! tell me, my dear miss hawkins—”
 “sh! i know what you are going to ask. i do like washington—i like
 it ever so much!”
 “no, but i was going to ask—”
 “yes, i am coming to it, coming to it as fast as i can. it is my first
 visit. i think you should know that yourself.”
 and straightway a wave of the crowd swept her beyond his reach.
 “now what can the girl mean? of course she likes washington—i’m not
 such a dummy as to have to ask her that. and as to its being her first
 visit, why bang it, she knows that i knew it was. does she think i have
 turned idiot? curious girl, anyway. but how they do swarm about her! she
 is the reigning belle of washington after this night. she’ll know five
 hundred of the heaviest guns in the town before this night’s nonsense is
 over. and this isn’t even the beginning. just as i used to say—she’ll
 be a card in the matter of—yes sir! she shall turn the men’s heads
 and i’ll turn the women’s! what a team that will be in politics here. i
 wouldn’t take a quarter of a million for what i can do in this present
 session—no indeed i wouldn’t. now, here—i don’t altogether
 like this. that insignificant secretary of legation is—why, she’s
 smiling on him as if he—and now on the admiral! now she’s
 illuminating that stuffy congressman from massachusetts—vulgar
 ungrammatcal shovel-maker—greasy knave of spades. i don’t like this
 sort of thing. she doesn’t appear to be much distressed about me—she
 hasn’t looked this way once. all right, my bird of paradise, if it suits
 you, go on. but i think i know your sex. i’ll go to smiling around a
 little, too, and see what effect that will have on you.”
 and he did “smile around a little,” and got as near to her as he could to
 watch the effect, but the scheme was a failure—he could not get her
 attention. she seemed wholly unconscious of him, and so he could not flirt
 with any spirit; he could only talk disjointedly; he could not keep his
 eyes on the charmers he talked to; he grew irritable, jealous, and very
 unhappy. he gave up his enterprise, leaned his shoulder against a fluted
 pilaster and pouted while he kept watch upon laura’s every movement. his
 other shoulder stole the bloom from many a lovely cheek that brushed him
 in the surging crush, but he noted it not. he was too busy cursing himself
 inwardly for being an egotistical imbecile. an hour ago he had thought to
 take this country lass under his protection and show her “life” and enjoy
 her wonder and delight—and here she was, immersed in the marvel up
 to her eyes, and just a trifle more at home in it than he was himself. and
 now his angry comments ran on again:
 “now she’s sweetening old brother balaam; and he—well he is inviting
 her to the congressional prayer-meeting, no doubt—better let old
 dilworthy alone to see that she doesn’t overlook that. and now its
 splurge, of new york; and now its batters of new hampshire—and now
 the vice president! well i may as well adjourn. i’ve got enough.”
 but he hadn’t. he got as far as the door—and then struggled back to
 take one more look, hating himself all the while for his weakness.
 toward midnight, when supper was announced, the crowd thronged to the
 supper room where a long table was decked out with what seemed a rare
 repast, but which consisted of things better calculated to feast the eye
 than the appetite. the ladies were soon seated in files along the wall,
 and in groups here and there, and the colored waiters filled the plates
 and glasses and the male guests moved hither and thither conveying them to
 the privileged sex.
 harry took an ice and stood up by the table with other gentlemen, and
 listened to the buzz of conversation while he ate.
 from these remarks he learned a good deal about laura that was news to
 him. for instance, that she was of a distinguished western family; that
 she was highly educated; that she was very rich and a great landed
 heiress; that she was not a professor of religion, and yet was a christian
 in the truest and best sense of the word, for her whole heart was devoted
 to the accomplishment of a great and noble enterprise—none other
 than the sacrificing of her landed estates to the uplifting of the
 down-trodden negro and the turning of his erring feet into the way of
 light and righteousness. harry observed that as soon as one listener had
 absorbed the story, he turned about and delivered it to his next neighbor
 and the latter individual straightway passed it on. and thus he saw it
 travel the round of the gentlemen and overflow rearward among the ladies.
 he could not trace it backward to its fountain head, and so he could not
 tell who it was that started it.
 one thing annoyed harry a great deal; and that was the reflection that he
 might have been in washington days and days ago and thrown his
 fascinations about laura with permanent effect while she was new and
 strange to the capital, instead of dawdling in philadelphia to no purpose.
 he feared he had “missed a trick,” as he expressed it.
 he only found one little opportunity of speaking again with laura before
 the evening’s festivities ended, and then, for the first time in years,
 his airy self-complacency failed him, his tongue’s easy confidence forsook
 it in a great measure, and he was conscious of an unheroic timidity. he
 was glad to get away and find a place where he could despise himself in
 private and try to grow his clipped plumes again.
 when laura reached home she was tired but exultant, and senator dilworthy
 was pleased and satisfied. he called laura “my daughter,” next morning,
 and gave her some “pin money,” as he termed it, and she sent a hundred and
 fifty dollars of it to her mother and loaned a trifle to col. sellers.
 then the senator had a long private conference with laura, and unfolded
 certain plans of his for the good of the country, and religion, and the
 poor, and temperance, and showed her how she could assist him in
 developing these worthy and noble enterprises.
 laura soon discovered that there were three distinct aristocracies in
 washington. one of these, (nick-named the antiques,) consisted of
 cultivated, high-bred old families who looked back with pride upon an
 ancestry that had been always great in the nation’s councils and its wars
 from the birth of the republic downward. into this select circle it was
 difficult to gain admission. no.  was the aristocracy of the middle
 ground—of which, more anon. no.  lay beyond; of it we will say a
 word here. we will call it the aristocracy of the parvenus—as,
 indeed, the general public did. official position, no matter how obtained,
 entitled a man to a place in it, and carried his family with him, no
 matter whence they sprang. great wealth gave a man a still higher and
 nobler place in it than did official position. if this wealth had been
 acquired by conspicuous ingenuity, with just a pleasant little spice of
 illegality about it, all the better. this aristocracy was “fast,” and not
 averse to ostentation.
 the aristocracy of the antiques ignored the aristocracy of the parvenus;
 the parvenus laughed at the antiques, (and secretly envied them.)
 there were certain important “society” customs which one in laura’s
 position needed to understand. for instance, when a lady of any prominence
 comes to one of our cities and takes up her residence, all the ladies of
 her grade favor her in turn with an initial call, giving their cards to
 the servant at the door by way of introduction. they come singly,
 sometimes; sometimes in couples; and always in elaborate full dress. they
 talk two minutes and a quarter and then go. if the lady receiving the call
 desires a further acquaintance, she must return the visit within two
 weeks; to neglect it beyond that time means “let the matter drop.” but if
 she does return the visit within two weeks, it then becomes the other
 party’s privilege to continue the acquaintance or drop it. she signifies
 her willingness to continue it by calling again any time within
 twelve-months; after that, if the parties go on calling upon each other
 once a year, in our large cities, that is sufficient, and the
 acquaintanceship holds good. the thing goes along smoothly, now. the
 annual visits are made and returned with peaceful regularity and bland
 satisfaction, although it is not necessary that the two ladies shall
 actually see each other oftener than once every few years. their cards
 preserve the intimacy and keep the acquaintanceship intact.
 for instance, mrs. a. pays her annual visit, sits in her carriage and
 sends in her card with the lower right hand corner turned down, which
 signifies that she has “called in person;” mrs. b: sends down word that
 she is “engaged” or “wishes to be excused”—or if she is a parvenu
 and low-bred, she perhaps sends word that she is “not at home.” very good;
 mrs. a. drives on happy and content. if mrs. a.’s daughter marries, or a
 child is born to the family, mrs. b. calls, sends in her card with the
 upper left hand corner turned down, and then goes along about her affairs—for
 that inverted corner means “congratulations.” if mrs. b.’s husband falls
 downstairs and breaks his neck, mrs. a. calls, leaves her card with the
 upper right hand corner turned down, and then takes her departure; this
 corner means “condolence.” it is very necessary to get the corners right,
 else one may unintentionally condole with a friend on a wedding or
 congratulate her upon a funeral. if either lady is about to leave the
 city, she goes to the other’s house and leaves her card with “p. p. c.”
 engraved under the name—which signifies, “pay parting call.” but
 enough of etiquette. laura was early instructed in the mysteries of
 society life by a competent mentor, and thus was preserved from
 troublesome mistakes.
 the first fashionable call she received from a member of the ancient
 nobility, otherwise the antiques, was of a pattern with all she received
 from that limb of the aristocracy afterward. this call was paid by mrs.
 major-general fulke-fulkerson and daughter. they drove up at one in the
 afternoon in a rather antiquated vehicle with a faded coat of arms on the
 panels, an aged white-wooled negro coachman on the box and a younger
 darkey beside him—the footman. both of these servants were dressed
 in dull brown livery that had seen considerable service.
 the ladies entered the drawing-room in full character; that is to say,
 with elizabethan stateliness on the part of the dowager, and an easy grace
 and dignity on the part of the young lady that had a nameless something
 about it that suggested conscious superiority. the dresses of both ladies
 were exceedingly rich, as to material, but as notably modest as to color
 and ornament. all parties having seated themselves, the dowager delivered
 herself of a remark that was not unusual in its form, and yet it came from
 her lips with the impressiveness of scripture:
 “the weather has been unpropitious of late, miss hawkins.”
 “it has indeed,” said laura. “the climate seems to be variable.”
 “it is its nature of old, here,” said the daughter—stating it
 apparently as a fact, only, and by her manner waving aside all personal
 responsibility on account of it. “is it not so, mamma?”
 “quite so, my child. do you like winter, miss hawkins?” she said “like” as
 if she had an idea that its dictionary meaning was “approve of.”
 “not as well as summer—though i think all seasons have their
 charms.”
 “it is a very just remark. the general held similar views. he considered
 snow in winter proper; sultriness in summer legitimate; frosts in the
 autumn the same, and rains in spring not objectionable. he was not an
 exacting man. and i call to mind now that he always admired thunder. you
 remember, child, your father always admired thunder?”
 “he adored it.”
 “no doubt it reminded him of battle,” said laura.
 “yes, i think perhaps it did. he had a great respect for nature. he often
 said there was something striking about the ocean. you remember his saying
 that, daughter?”
 “yes, often, mother. i remember it very well.”
 “and hurricanes... he took a great interest in hurricanes. and animals.
 dogs, especially—hunting dogs. also comets. i think we all have our
 predilections. i think it is this that gives variety to our tastes.”
 laura coincided with this view.
 “do you find it hard and lonely to be so far from your home and friends,
 miss hawkins?”
 “i do find it depressing sometimes, but then there is so much about me
 here that is novel and interesting that my days are made up more of
 sunshine than shadow.”
 “washington is not a dull city in the season,” said the young lady. “we
 have some very good society indeed, and one need not be at a loss for
 means to pass the time pleasantly. are you fond of watering-places, miss
 hawkins?”
 “i have really had no experience of them, but i have always felt a strong
 desire to see something of fashionable watering-place life.”
 “we of washington are unfortunately situated in that respect,” said the
 dowager. “it is a tedious distance to newport. but there is no help for
 it.”
 laura said to herself, “long branch and cape may are nearer than newport;
 doubtless these places are low; i’ll feel my way a little and see.” then
 she said aloud:
 “why i thought that long branch—”
 there was no need to “feel” any further—there was that in both faces
 before her which made that truth apparent. the dowager said:
 “nobody goes there, miss hawkins—at least only persons of no
 position in society. and the president.” she added that with tranquility.
 “newport is damp, and cold, and windy and excessively disagreeable,” said
 the daughter, “but it is very select. one cannot be fastidious about minor
 matters when one has no choice.”
 the visit had spun out nearly three minutes, now. both ladies rose with
 grave dignity, conferred upon laura a formal invitation to call, and then
 retired from the conference. laura remained in the drawing-room and left
 them to pilot themselves out of the house—an inhospitable thing, it
 seemed to her, but then she was following her instructions. she stood,
 steeped in reverie, a while, and then she said:
 “i think i could always enjoy icebergs—as scenery but not as
 company.”
 still, she knew these two people by reputation, and was aware that they
 were not ice-bergs when they were in their own waters and amid their
 legitimate surroundings, but on the contrary were people to be respected
 for their stainless characters and esteemed for their social virtues and
 their benevolent impulses. she thought it a pity that they had to be such
 changed and dreary creatures on occasions of state.
 the first call laura received from the other extremity of the washington
 aristocracy followed close upon the heels of the one we have just been
 describing. the callers this time were the hon. mrs. oliver higgins, the
 hon. mrs. patrique oreille (pronounced o-relay,) miss bridget (pronounced
 breezhay) oreille, mrs. peter gashly, miss gashly, and miss emmeline
 gashly.
 the three carriages arrived at the same moment from different directions.
 they were new and wonderfully shiny, and the brasses on the harness were
 highly polished and bore complicated monograms. there were showy coats of
 arms, too, with latin mottoes. the coachmen and footmen were clad in
 bright new livery, of striking colors, and they had black rosettes with
 shaving-brushes projecting above them, on the sides of their stove-pipe
 hats.
 when the visitors swept into the drawing-room they filled the place with a
 suffocating sweetness procured at the perfumer’s. their costumes, as to
 architecture, were the latest fashion intensified; they were rainbow-hued;
 they were hung with jewels—chiefly diamonds. it would have been
 plain to any eye that it had cost something to upholster these women.
 the hon. mrs. oliver higgins was the wife of a delegate from a distant
 territory—a gentleman who had kept the principal “saloon,” and sold
 the best whiskey in the principal village in his wilderness, and so, of
 course, was recognized as the first man of his commonwealth and its
 fittest representative.
 he was a man of paramount influence at home, for he was public spirited,
 he was chief of the fire department, he had an admirable command of
 profane language, and had killed several “parties.” his shirt fronts were
 always immaculate; his boots daintily polished, and no man could lift a
 foot and fire a dead shot at a stray speck of dirt on it with a white
 handkerchief with a finer grace than he; his watch chain weighed a pound;
 the gold in his finger ring was worth forty five dollars; he wore a
 diamond cluster-pin and he parted his hair behind. he had always been
 regarded as the most elegant gentleman in his territory, and it was
 conceded by all that no man thereabouts was anywhere near his equal in the
 telling of an obscene story except the venerable white-haired governor
 himself. the hon. higgins had not come to serve his country in washington
 for nothing. the appropriation which he had engineered through congress
 for the maintenance of the indians in his territory would have made all
 those savages rich if it had ever got to them.
 the hon. mrs. higgins was a picturesque woman, and a fluent talker, and
 she held a tolerably high station among the parvenus. her english was fair
 enough, as a general thing—though, being of new york origin, she had
 the fashion peculiar to many natives of that city of pronouncing saw and
 law as if they were spelt sawr and lawr.
 petroleum was the agent that had suddenly transformed the gashlys from
 modest hard-working country village folk into “loud” aristocrats and
 ornaments of the city.
 the hon. patrique oreille was a wealthy frenchman from cork. not that he
 was wealthy when he first came from cork, but just the reverse. when he
 first landed in new york with his wife, he had only halted at castle
 garden for a few minutes to receive and exhibit papers showing that he had
 resided in this country two years—and then he voted the democratic
 ticket and went up town to hunt a house. he found one and then went to
 work as assistant to an architect and builder, carrying a hod all day and
 studying politics evenings. industry and economy soon enabled him to start
 a low rum shop in a foul locality, and this gave him political influence.
 in our country it is always our first care to see that our people have the
 opportunity of voting for their choice of men to represent and govern them—we
 do not permit our great officials to appoint the little officials. we
 prefer to have so tremendous a power as that in our own hands. we hold it
 safest to elect our judges and everybody else. in our cities, the ward
 meetings elect delegates to the nominating conventions and instruct them
 whom to nominate. the publicans and their retainers rule the ward meetings
 (for everybody else hates the worry of politics and stays at home); the
 delegates from the ward meetings organize as a nominating convention and
 make up a list of candidates—one convention offering a democratic
 and another a republican list of incorruptibles; and then the great meek
 public come forward at the proper time and make unhampered choice and
 bless heaven that they live in a free land where no form of despotism can
 ever intrude.
 patrick o’riley (as his name then stood) created friends and influence
 very fast, for he was always on hand at the police courts to give straw
 bail for his customers or establish an alibi for them in case they had
 been beating anybody to death on his premises. consequently he presently
 became a political leader, and was elected to a petty office under the
 city government. out of a meager salary he soon saved money enough to open
 quite a stylish liquor saloon higher up town, with a faro bank attached
 and plenty of capital to conduct it with. this gave him fame and great
 respectability. the position of alderman was forced upon him, and it was
 just the same as presenting him a gold mine. he had fine horses and
 carriages, now, and closed up his whiskey mill.
 by and by he became a large contractor for city work, and was a bosom
 friend of the great and good wm. m. weed himself, who had stolen
 $,, from the city and was a man so envied, so honored,—so
 adored, indeed, that when the sheriff went to his office to arrest him as
 a felon, that sheriff blushed and apologized, and one of the illustrated
 papers made a picture of the scene and spoke of the matter in such a way
 as to show that the editor regretted that the offense of an arrest had
 been offered to so exalted a personage as mr. weed.
 mr. o’riley furnished shingle nails to the new court house at three
 thousand dollars a keg, and eighteen gross of -cent thermometers at
 fifteen hundred dollars a dozen; the controller and the board of audit
 passed the bills, and a mayor, who was simply ignorant but not criminal,
 signed them. when they were paid, mr. o’riley’s admirers gave him a
 solitaire diamond pin of the size of a filbert, in imitation of the
 liberality of mr. weed’s friends, and then mr. o’riley retired from active
 service and amused himself with buying real estate at enormous figures and
 holding it in other people’s names. by and by the newspapers came out with
 exposures and called weed and o’riley “thieves,”—whereupon the
 people rose as one man (voting repeatedly) and elected the two gentlemen
 to their proper theatre of action, the new york legislature. the
 newspapers clamored, and the courts proceeded to try the new legislators
 for their small irregularities. our admirable jury system enabled the
 persecuted ex-officials to secure a jury of nine gentlemen from a
 neighboring asylum and three graduates from sing-sing, and presently they
 walked forth with characters vindicated. the legislature was called upon
 to spew them forth—a thing which the legislature declined to do. it
 was like asking children to repudiate their own father. it was a
 legislature of the modern pattern.
 being now wealthy and distinguished, mr. o’riley, still bearing the
 legislative “hon.” attached to his name (for titles never die in america,
 although we do take a republican pride in poking fun at such trifles),
 sailed for europe with his family. they traveled all about, turning their
 noses up at every thing, and not finding it a difficult thing to do,
 either, because nature had originally given those features a cast in that
 direction; and finally they established themselves in paris, that paradise
 of americans of their sort.—they staid there two years and learned
 to speak english with a foreign accent—not that it hadn’t always had
 a foreign accent (which was indeed the case) but now the nature of it was
 changed. finally they returned home and became ultra fashionables. they
 landed here as the hon. patrique oreille and family, and so are known unto
 this day.
 laura provided seats for her visitors and they immediately launched forth
 into a breezy, sparkling conversation with that easy confidence which is
 to be found only among persons accustomed to high life.
 “i’ve been intending to call sooner, miss hawkins,” said the hon. mrs.
 oreille, “but the weather’s been so horrid. how do you like washington?”
 laura liked it very well indeed.
 mrs. gashly—“is it your first visit?”
 yes, it was her first.
 all—“indeed?”
 mrs. oreille—“i’m afraid you’ll despise the weather, miss hawkins.
 it’s perfectly awful. it always is. i tell mr. oreille i can’t and i won’t
 put up with any such a climate. if we were obliged to do it, i wouldn’t
 mind it; but we are not obliged to, and so i don’t see the use of it.
 sometimes its real pitiful the way the childern pine for parry—don’t
 look so sad, bridget, ‘ma chere’—poor child, she can’t hear parry
 mentioned without getting the blues.”
 mrs. gashly—“well i should think so, mrs. oreille. a body lives in
 paris, but a body, only stays here. i dote on paris; i’d druther scrimp
 along on ten thousand dollars a year there, than suffer and worry here on
 a real decent income.”
 miss gashly—“well then, i wish you’d take us back, mother; i’m sure
 i hate this stoopid country enough, even if it is our dear native land.”
 miss emmeline gashly—“what and leave poor johnny peterson behind?”
 [an airy genial laugh applauded this sally].
 miss gashly—“sister, i should think you’d be ashamed of yourself!”
 miss emmeline—“oh, you needn’t ruffle your feathers so: i was only
 joking. he don’t mean anything by coming to the house every evening—only
 comes to see mother. of course that’s all!” [general laughter].
 miss g. prettily confused—“emmeline, how can you!”
 mrs. g.—“let your sister alone, emmeline. i never saw such a tease!”
 mrs. oreille—“what lovely corals you have, miss hawkins! just look
 at them, bridget, dear. i’ve a great passion for corals—it’s a pity
 they’re getting a little common. i have some elegant ones—not as
 elegant as yours, though—but of course i don’t wear them now.”
 laura—“i suppose they are rather common, but still i have a great
 affection for these, because they were given to me by a dear old friend of
 our family named murphy. he was a very charming man, but very eccentric.
 we always supposed he was an irishman, but after he got rich he went
 abroad for a year or two, and when he came back you would have been amused
 to see how interested he was in a potato.
 he asked what it was! now you know that when providence shapes a mouth
 especially for the accommodation of a potato you can detect that fact at a
 glance when that mouth is in repose—foreign travel can never remove
 that sign. but he was a very delightful gentleman, and his little foible
 did not hurt him at all. we all have our shams—i suppose there is a
 sham somewhere about every individual, if we could manage to ferret it
 out. i would so like to go to france. i suppose our society here compares
 very favorably with french society does it not, mrs. oreille?”
 mrs. o.—“not by any means, miss hawkins! french society is much more
 elegant—much more so.”
 laura—“i am sorry to hear that. i suppose ours has deteriorated of
 late.”
 mrs. o.—“very much indeed. there are people in society here that
 have really no more money to live on than what some of us pay for servant
 hire. still i won’t say but what some of them are very good people—and
 respectable, too.”
 laura—“the old families seem to be holding themselves aloof, from
 what i hear. i suppose you seldom meet in society now, the people you used
 to be familiar with twelve or fifteen years ago?”
 mrs. o.—“oh, no-hardly ever.”
 mr. o’riley kept his first rum-mill and protected his customers from the
 law in those days, and this turn of the conversation was rather
 uncomfortable to madame than otherwise.
 hon. mrs. higgins—“is francois’ health good now, mrs. oreille?”
 mrs. o.—(thankful for the intervention)—“not very. a body
 couldn’t expect it. he was always delicate—especially his lungs—and
 this odious climate tells on him strong, now, after parry, which is so
 mild.”
 mrs. h:—“i should think so. husband says percy’ll die if he don’t
 have a change; and so i’m going to swap round a little and see what can be
 done. i saw a lady from florida last week, and she recommended key west. i
 told her percy couldn’t abide winds, as he was threatened with a pulmonary
 affection, and then she said try st. augustine. it’s an awful distance—ten
 or twelve hundred mile, they say but then in a case of this kind—a
 body can’t stand back for trouble, you know.”
 mrs. o.—“no, of course that’s off. if francois don’t get better soon
 we’ve got to look out for some other place, or else europe. we’ve thought
 some of the hot springs, but i don’t know. it’s a great responsibility and
 a body wants to go cautious. is hildebrand about again, mrs. gashly?”
 mrs. g.—“yes, but that’s about all. it was indigestion, you know,
 and it looks as if it was chronic. and you know i do dread dyspepsia.
 we’ve all been worried a good deal about him. the doctor recommended baked
 apple and spoiled meat, and i think it done him good. it’s about the only
 thing that will stay on his stomach now-a-days. we have dr. shovel now.
 who’s your doctor, mrs. higgins?”
 mrs. h.—“well, we had dr. spooner a good while, but he runs so much
 to emetics, which i think are weakening, that we changed off and took dr.
 leathers. we like him very much. he has a fine european reputation, too.
 the first thing he suggested for percy was to have him taken out in the
 back yard for an airing, every afternoon, with nothing at all on.”
 mrs. o. and mrs. g.—“what!”
 mrs. h.—“as true as i’m sitting here. and it actually helped him for
 two or three days; it did indeed. but after that the doctor said it seemed
 to be too severe and so he has fell back on hot foot-baths at night and
 cold showers in the morning. but i don’t think there can be any good sound
 help for him in such a climate as this. i believe we are going to lose him
 if we don’t make a change.”
 mrs. o. “i suppose you heard of the fright we had two weeks ago last
 saturday? no? why that is strange—but come to remember, you’ve all
 been away to richmond. francois tumbled from the sky light—in the
 second-story hall clean down to the first floor—”
 everybody—“mercy!”
 mrs. o.—“yes indeed—and broke two of his ribs—”
 everybody—“what!”
 mrs. o. “just as true as you live. first we thought he must be injured
 internally. it was fifteen minutes past  in the evening. of course we
 were all distracted in a moment—everybody was flying everywhere, and
 nobody doing anything worth anything. by and by i flung out next door and
 dragged in dr. sprague; president of the medical university no time to go
 for our own doctor of course—and the minute he saw francois he said,
 ‘send for your own physician, madam;’ said it as cross as a bear, too, and
 turned right on his heel, and cleared out without doing a thing!”
 everybody—“the mean, contemptible brute!”
 mrs. o—“well you may say it. i was nearly out of my wits by this
 time. but we hurried off the servants after our own doctor and telegraphed
 mother—she was in new york and rushed down on the first train; and
 when the doctor got there, lo and behold you he found francois had broke
 one of his legs, too!”
 everybody—“goodness!”
 mrs. o.—“yes. so he set his leg and bandaged it up, and fixed his
 ribs and gave him a dose of something to quiet down his excitement and put
 him to sleep—poor thing he was trembling and frightened to death and
 it was pitiful to see him. we had him in my bed—mr. oreille slept in
 the guest room and i laid down beside francois—but not to sleep
 bless you no. bridget and i set up all night, and the doctor staid till
 two in the morning, bless his old heart.—when mother got there she
 was so used up with anxiety, that she had to go to bed and have the
 doctor; but when she found that francois was not in immediate danger she
 rallied, and by night she was able to take a watch herself. well for three
 days and nights we three never left that bedside only to take an hour’s
 nap at a time. and then the doctor said francois was out of danger and if
 ever there was a thankful set, in this world, it was us.”
 laura’s respect for these women had augmented during this conversation,
 naturally enough; affection and devotion are qualities that are able to
 adorn and render beautiful a character that is otherwise unattractive, and
 even repulsive.
 mrs. gashly—“i do believe i should a died if i had been in your
 place, mrs. oreille. the time hildebrand was so low with the pneumonia
 emmeline and me were all alone with him most of the time and we never took
 a minute’s sleep for as much as two days and nights. it was at newport and
 we wouldn’t trust hired nurses. one afternoon he had a fit, and jumped up
 and run out on the portico of the hotel with nothing in the world on and
 the wind a blowing like ice and we after him scared to death; and when the
 ladies and gentlemen saw that he had a fit, every lady scattered for her
 room and not a gentleman lifted his hand to help, the wretches! well after
 that his life hung by a thread for as much as ten days, and the minute he
 was out of danger emmeline and me just went to bed sick and worn out. i
 never want to pass through such a time again. poor dear francois—which
 leg did he break, mrs. oreille!”
 mrs. o.—“it was his right hand hind leg. jump down, francois dear,
 and show the ladies what a cruel limp you’ve got yet.”
 francois demurred, but being coaxed and delivered gently upon the floor,
 he performed very satisfactorily, with his “right hand hind leg” in the
 air. all were affected—even laura—but hers was an affection of
 the stomach. the country-bred girl had not suspected that the little
 whining ten-ounce black and tan reptile, clad in a red embroidered pigmy
 blanket and reposing in mrs. oreille’s lap all through the visit was the
 individual whose sufferings had been stirring the dormant generosities of
 her nature. she said:
 “poor little creature! you might have lost him!”
 mrs. o.—“o pray don’t mention it, miss hawkins—it gives me
 such a turn!”
 laura—“and hildebrand and percy—are they—are they like
 this one?”
 mrs. g.—“no, hilly has considerable skye blood in him, i believe.”
 mrs. h.—“percy’s the same, only he is two months and ten days older
 and has his ears cropped. his father, martin farquhar tupper, was sickly,
 and died young, but he was the sweetest disposition.—his mother had
 heart disease but was very gentle and resigned, and a wonderful ratter.”
 as impossible and exasperating as this conversation may sound to a
 person who is not an idiot, it is scarcely in any respect an
 exaggeration of one which one of us actually listened to in an american
 drawing room—otherwise we could not venture to put such a chapter
 into a book which, professes to deal with social possibilities.—the
 so carried away had the visitors become by their interest attaching to
 this discussion of family matters, that their stay had been prolonged to a
 very improper and unfashionable length; but they suddenly recollected
 themselves now and took their departure.
 laura’s scorn was boundless. the more she thought of these people and
 their extraordinary talk, the more offensive they seemed to her; and yet
 she confessed that if one must choose between the two extreme
 aristocracies it might be best, on the whole, looking at things from a
 strictly business point of view, to herd with the parvenus; she was in
 washington solely to compass a certain matter and to do it at any cost,
 and these people might be useful to her, while it was plain that her
 purposes and her schemes for pushing them would not find favor in the eyes
 of the antiques. if it came to choice—and it might come to that,
 sooner or later—she believed she could come to a decision without
 much difficulty or many pangs.
 but the best aristocracy of the three washington castes, and really the
 most powerful, by far, was that of the middle ground: it was made up of
 the families of public men from nearly every state in the union—men
 who held positions in both the executive and legislative branches of the
 government, and whose characters had been for years blemishless, both at
 home and at the capital. these gentlemen and their households were
 unostentatious people; they were educated and refined; they troubled
 themselves but little about the two other orders of nobility, but moved
 serenely in their wide orbit, confident in their own strength and well
 aware of the potency of their influence. they had no troublesome
 appearances to keep up, no rivalries which they cared to distress
 themselves about, no jealousies to fret over. they could afford to mind
 their own affairs and leave other combinations to do the same or do
 otherwise, just as they chose. they were people who were beyond reproach,
 and that was sufficient.
 senator dilworthy never came into collision with any of these factions. he
 labored for them all and with them all. he said that all men were brethren
 and all were entitled to the honest unselfish help and countenance of a
 christian laborer in the public vineyard.
 laura concluded, after reflection, to let circumstances determine the
 course it might be best for her to pursue as regarded the several
 aristocracies.
 now it might occur to the reader that perhaps laura had been somewhat
 rudely suggestive in her remarks to mrs. oreille when the subject of
 corals was under discussion, but it did not occur to laura herself. she
 was not a person of exaggerated refinement; indeed, the society and the
 influences that had formed her character had not been of a nature
 calculated to make her so; she thought that “give and take was fair play,”
 and that to parry an offensive thrust with a sarcasm was a neat and
 legitimate thing to do. she sometimes talked to people in a way which some
 ladies would consider, actually shocking; but laura rather prided herself
 upon some of her exploits of that character. we are sorry we cannot make
 her a faultless heroine; but we cannot, for the reason that she was human.
 she considered herself a superior conversationist. long ago, when the
 possibility had first been brought before her mind that some day she might
 move in washington society, she had recognized the fact that practiced
 conversational powers would be a necessary weapon in that field; she had
 also recognized the fact that since her dealings there must be mainly with
 men, and men whom she supposed to be exceptionally cultivated and able,
 she would need heavier shot in her magazine than mere brilliant “society”
 nothings; whereupon she had at once entered upon a tireless and elaborate
 course of reading, and had never since ceased to devote every unoccupied
 moment to this sort of preparation. having now acquired a happy smattering
 of various information, she used it with good effect—she passed for
 a singularly well informed woman in washington. the quality of her
 literary tastes had necessarily undergone constant improvement under this
 regimen, and as necessarily, also the duality of her language had
 improved, though it cannot be denied that now and then her former
 condition of life betrayed itself in just perceptible inelegancies of
 expression and lapses of grammar.
 when laura had been in washington three months, she was still the same
 person, in one respect, that she was when she first arrived there—that
 is to say, she still bore the name of laura hawkins. otherwise she was
 perceptibly changed.—
 she had arrived in a state of grievous uncertainty as to what manner of
 woman she was, physically and intellectually, as compared with eastern
 women; she was well satisfied, now, that her beauty was confessed, her
 mind a grade above the average, and her powers of fascination rather
 extraordinary. so she was at ease upon those points. when she arrived, she
 was possessed of habits of economy and not possessed of money; now she
 dressed elaborately, gave but little thought to the cost of things, and
 was very well fortified financially. she kept her mother and washington
 freely supplied with money, and did the same by col. sellers—who
 always insisted upon giving his note for loans—with interest; he was
 rigid upon that; she must take interest; and one of the colonel’s greatest
 satisfactions was to go over his accounts and note what a handsome sum
 this accruing interest amounted to, and what a comfortable though modest
 support it would yield laura in case reverses should overtake her.
 in truth he could not help feeling that he was an efficient shield for her
 against poverty; and so, if her expensive ways ever troubled him for a
 brief moment, he presently dismissed the thought and said to himself, “let
 her go on—even if she loses everything she is still safe—this
 interest will always afford her a good easy income.”
 laura was on excellent terms with a great many members of congress, and
 there was an undercurrent of suspicion in some quarters that she was one
 of that detested class known as “lobbyists;” but what belle could escape
 slander in such a city? fairminded people declined to condemn her on mere
 suspicion, and so the injurious talk made no very damaging headway. she
 was very gay, now, and very celebrated, and she might well expect to be
 assailed by many kinds of gossip. she was growing used to celebrity, and
 could already sit calm and seemingly unconscious, under the fire of fifty
 lorgnettes in a theatre, or even overhear the low voice “that’s she!” as
 she passed along the street without betraying annoyance.
 the whole air was full of a vague vast scheme which was to eventuate in
 filling laura’s pockets with millions of money; some had one idea of the
 scheme, and some another, but nobody had any exact knowledge upon the
 subject. all that any one felt sure about, was that laura’s landed estates
 were princely in value and extent, and that the government was anxious to
 get hold of them for public purposes, and that laura was willing to make
 the sale but not at all anxious about the matter and not at all in a
 hurry. it was whispered that senator dilworthy was a stumbling block in
 the way of an immediate sale, because he was resolved that the government
 should not have the lands except with the understanding that they should
 be devoted to the uplifting of the negro race; laura did not care what
 they were devoted to, it was said, (a world of very different gossip to
 the contrary notwithstanding,) but there were several other heirs and they
 would be guided entirely by the senator’s wishes; and finally, many people
 averred that while it would be easy to sell the lands to the government
 for the benefit of the negro, by resorting to the usual methods of
 influencing votes, senator dilworthy was unwilling to have so noble a
 charity sullied by any taint of corruption—he was resolved that not
 a vote should be bought. nobody could get anything definite from laura
 about these matters, and so gossip had to feed itself chiefly upon
 guesses. but the effect of it all was, that laura was considered to be
 very wealthy and likely to be vastly more so in a little while.
 consequently she was much courted and as much envied: her wealth attracted
 many suitors. perhaps they came to worship her riches, but they remained
 to worship her. some of the noblest men of the time succumbed to her
 fascinations. she frowned upon no lover when he made his first advances,
 but by and by when she was hopelessly enthralled, he learned from her own
 lips that she had formed a resolution never to marry. then he would go
 away hating and cursing the whole sex, and she would calmly add his scalp
 to her string, while she mused upon the bitter day that col. selby
 trampled her love and her pride in the dust. in time it came to be said
 that her way was paved with broken hearts.
 poor washington gradually woke up to the fact that he too was an
 intellectual marvel as well as his gifted sister. he could not conceive
 how it had come about (it did not occur to him that the gossip about his
 family’s great wealth had any thing to do with it). he could not account
 for it by any process of reasoning, and was simply obliged to accept the
 fact and give up trying to solve the riddle. he found himself dragged into
 society and courted, wondered at and envied very much as if he were one of
 those foreign barbers who flit over here now and then with a
 self-conferred title of nobility and marry some rich fool’s absurd
 daughter. sometimes at a dinner party or a reception he would find himself
 the centre of interest, and feel unutterably uncomfortable in the
 discovery. being obliged to say something, he would mine his brain and put
 in a blast and when the smoke and flying debris had cleared away the
 result would be what seemed to him but a poor little intellectual clod of
 dirt or two, and then he would be astonished to see everybody as lost in
 admiration as if he had brought up a ton or two of virgin gold. every
 remark he made delighted his hearers and compelled their applause; he
 overheard people say he was exceedingly bright—they were chiefly
 mammas and marriageable young ladies. he found that some of his good
 things were being repeated about the town. whenever he heard of an
 instance of this kind, he would keep that particular remark in mind and
 analyze it at home in private. at first he could not see that the remark
 was anything better than a parrot might originate; but by and by he began
 to feel that perhaps he underrated his powers; and after that he used to
 analyze his good things with a deal of comfort, and find in them a
 brilliancy which would have been unapparent to him in earlier days—and
 then he would make a note of that good thing and say it again the first
 time he found himself in a new company. presently he had saved up quite a
 repertoire of brilliancies; and after that he confined himself to
 repeating these and ceased to originate any more, lest he might injure his
 reputation by an unlucky effort.
 he was constantly having young ladies thrust upon his notice at
 receptions, or left upon his hands at parties, and in time he began to
 feel that he was being deliberately persecuted in this way; and after that
 he could not enjoy society because of his constant dread of these female
 ambushes and surprises. he was distressed to find that nearly every time
 he showed a young lady a polite attention he was straightway reported to
 be engaged to her; and as some of these reports got into the newspapers
 occasionally, he had to keep writing to louise that they were lies and she
 must believe in him and not mind them or allow them to grieve her.
 washington was as much in the dark as anybody with regard to the great
 wealth that was hovering in the air and seemingly on the point of tumbling
 into the family pocket. laura would give him no satisfaction. all she
 would say, was:
 “wait. be patient. you will see.”
 “but will it be soon, laura?”
 “it will not be very long, i think.”
 “but what makes you think so?”
 “i have reasons—and good ones. just wait, and be patient.”
 “but is it going to be as much as people say it is?”
 “what do they say it is?”
 “oh, ever so much. millions!”
 “yes, it will be a great sum.”
 “but how great, laura? will it be millions?”
 “yes, you may call it that. yes, it will be millions. there, now—does
 that satisfy you?”
 “splendid! i can wait. i can wait patiently—ever so patiently. once
 i was near selling the land for twenty thousand dollars; once for thirty
 thousand dollars; once after that for seven thousand dollars; and once for
 forty thousand dollars—but something always told me not to do it.
 what a fool i would have been to sell it for such a beggarly trifle! it is
 the land that’s to bring the money, isn’t it laura? you can tell me that
 much, can’t you?”
 “yes, i don’t mind saying that much. it is the land.
 “but mind—don’t ever hint that you got it from me. don’t mention me
 in the matter at all, washington.”
 “all right—i won’t. millions! isn’t it splendid! i mean to look
 around for a building lot; a lot with fine ornamental shrubbery and all
 that sort of thing. i will do it to-day. and i might as well see an
 architect, too, and get him to go to work at a plan for a house. i don’t
 intend to spare any expense; i mean to have the noblest house that money
 can build.” then after a pause—he did not notice laura’s smiles
 “laura, would you lay the main hall in encaustic tiles, or just in fancy
 patterns of hard wood?”
 laura laughed a good old-fashioned laugh that had more of her former
 natural self about it than any sound that had issued from her mouth in
 many weeks. she said:
 “you don’t change, washington. you still begin to squander a fortune right
 and left the instant you hear of it in the distance; you never wait till
 the foremost dollar of it arrives within a hundred miles of you,” —and
 she kissed her brother good bye and left him weltering in his dreams, so
 to speak.
 he got up and walked the floor feverishly during two hours; and when he
 sat down he had married louise, built a house, reared a family, married
 them off, spent upwards of eight hundred thousand dollars on mere
 luxuries, and died worth twelve millions.
 laura went down stairs, knocked at/the study door, and entered, scarcely
 waiting for the response. senator dilworthy was alone—with an open
 bible in his hand, upside down. laura smiled, and said, forgetting her
 acquired correctness of speech,
 “it is only me.”
 “ah, come in, sit down,” and the senator closed the book and laid it down.
 “i wanted to see you. time to report progress from the committee of the
 whole,” and the senator beamed with his own congressional wit.
 “in the committee of the whole things are working very well. we have made
 ever so much progress in a week. i believe that you and i together could
 run this government beautifully, uncle.”
 the senator beamed again. he liked to be called “uncle” by this beautiful
 woman.
 “did you see hopperson last night after the congressional prayer meeting?”
 “yes. he came. he’s a kind of—”
 “eh? he is one of my friends, laura. he’s a fine man, a very fine man. i
 don’t know any man in congress i’d sooner go to for help in any christian
 work. what did he say?”
 “oh, he beat around a little. he said he should like to help the negro,
 his heart went out to the negro, and all that—plenty of them say
 that but he was a little afraid of the tennessee land bill; if senator
 dilworthy wasn’t in it, he should suspect there was a fraud on the
 government.”
 “he said that, did he?”
 “yes. and he said he felt he couldn’t vote for it. he was shy.”
 “not shy, child, cautious. he’s a very cautious man. i have been with him
 a great deal on conference committees. he wants reasons, good ones. didn’t
 you show him he was in error about the bill?”
 “i did. i went over the whole thing. i had to tell him some of the side
 arrangements, some of the—”
 “you didn’t mention me?”
 “oh, no. i told him you were daft about the negro and the philanthropy
 part of it, as you are.”
 “daft is a little strong, laura. but you know that i wouldn’t touch this
 bill if it were not for the public good, and for the good of the colored
 race; much as i am interested in the heirs of this property, and would
 like to have them succeed.”
 laura looked a little incredulous, and the senator proceeded.
 “don’t misunderstand me, i don’t deny that it is for the interest of all
 of us that this bill should go through, and it will. i have no
 concealments from you. but i have one principle in my public life, which i
 should like you to keep in mind; it has always been my guide. i never push
 a private interest if it is not justified and ennobled by some larger
 public good. i doubt if a christian would be justified in working for his
 own salvation if it was not to aid in the salvation of his fellow men.”
 the senator spoke with feeling, and then added,
 “i hope you showed hopperson that our motives were pure?”
 “yes, and he seemed to have a new light on the measure: i think will vote
 for it.”
 “i hope so; his name will give tone and strength to it. i knew you would
 only have to show him that it was just and pure, in order to secure his
 cordial support.”
 “i think i convinced him. yes, i am perfectly sure he will vote right
 now.”
 “that’s good, that’s good,” said the senator; smiling, and rubbing his
 hands. “is there anything more?”
 “you’ll find some changes in that i guess,” handing the senator a printed
 list of names. “those checked off are all right.”
 “ah—’m—’m,” running his eye down the list. “that’s
 encouraging. what is the ‘c’ before some of the names, and the ‘b. b.’?”
 “those are my private marks. that ‘c’ stands for ‘convinced,’ with
 argument. the ‘b. b.’ is a general sign for a relative. you see it stands
 before three of the hon. committee. i expect to see the chairman of the
 committee to-day, mr. buckstone.”
 “so, you must, he ought to be seen without any delay. buckstone is a
 worldly sort of a fellow, but he has charitable impulses. if we secure him
 we shall have a favorable report by the committee, and it will be a great
 thing to be able to state that fact quietly where it will do good.”
 “oh, i saw senator balloon”
 “he will help us, i suppose? balloon is a whole-hearted fellow. i can’t
 help loving that man, for all his drollery and waggishness. he puts on an
 air of levity sometimes, but there aint a man in the senate knows the
 scriptures as he does. he did not make any objections?”
 “not exactly, he said—shall i tell you what he said?” asked laura
 glancing furtively at him.
 “certainly.”
 “he said he had no doubt it was a good thing; if senator dilworthy was in
 it, it would pay to look into it.”
 the senator laughed, but rather feebly, and said, “balloon is always full
 of his jokes.”
 “i explained it to him. he said it was all right, he only wanted a word
 with you,”, continued laura. “he is a handsome old gentleman, and he is
 gallant for an old man.”
 “my daughter,” said the senator, with a grave look, “i trust there was
 nothing free in his manner?”
 “free?” repeated laura, with indignation in her face. “with me!”
 “there, there, child. i meant nothing, balloon talks a little freely
 sometimes, with men. but he is right at heart. his term expires next year
 and i fear we shall lose him.”
 “he seemed to be packing the day i was there. his rooms were full of dry
 goods boxes, into which his servant was crowding all manner of old clothes
 and stuff: i suppose he will paint ‘pub. docs’ on them and frank them
 home. that’s good economy, isn’t it?”
 “yes, yes, but child, all congressmen do that. it may not be strictly
 honest, indeed it is not unless he had some public documents mixed in with
 the clothes.”
 “it’s a funny world. good-bye, uncle. i’m going to see that chairman.”
 and humming a cheery opera air, she departed to her room to dress for
 going out. before she did that, however, she took out her note book and
 was soon deep in its contents; marking, dashing, erasing, figuring, and
 talking to herself.
 “free! i wonder what dilworthy does think of me anyway? one . . . two . .
 . eight . . . seventeen . . . twenty-one . . . ’m’m . . . it takes a heap
 for a majority. wouldn’t dilworthy open his eyes if he knew some of the
 things balloon did say to me. there . . . . hopperson’s influence ought to
 count twenty . . . the sanctimonious old curmudgeon. son-in-law . . .
 sinecure in the negro institution. . . . that about gauges him. . . . the
 three committeemen . . . sons-in-law. nothing like a son-in-law here in
 washington or a brother-in-law. . . . and everybody has ’em. . . .let’s
 see: . . . sixty-one. . . . with places . . . twenty-five . . . persuaded—it
 is getting on; . . . . we’ll have two-thirds of congress in time . . .
 dilworthy must surely know i understand him. uncle dilworthy . . . . uncle
 balloon!—tells very amusing stories . . . when ladies are not
 present . . . i should think so . . . .’m . . . ’m. eighty-five. there. i
 must find that chairman. queer. . . . buckstone acts. . . . seemed to be
 in love . . . . . i was sure of it. he promised to come here . . . and he
 hasn’t. . . . strange. very strange . . . . i must chance to meet him
 to-day.”
 laura dressed and went out, thinking she was perhaps too early for mr.
 buckstone to come from the house, but as he lodged near the bookstore she
 would drop in there and keep a look out for him.
 while laura is on her errand to find mr. buckstone, it may not be out of
 the way to remark that she knew quite as much of washington life as
 senator dilworthy gave her credit for, and more than she thought proper to
 tell him. she was acquainted by this time with a good many of the young
 fellows of newspaper row; and exchanged gossip with them to their mutual
 advantage.
 they were always talking in the row, everlastingly gossiping, bantering
 and sarcastically praising things, and going on in a style which was a
 curious commingling of earnest and persiflage. col. sellers liked this
 talk amazingly, though he was sometimes a little at sea in it—and
 perhaps that didn’t lessen the relish of the conversation to the
 correspondents.
 it seems that they had got hold of the dry-goods box packing story about
 balloon, one day, and were talking it over when the colonel came in. the
 colonel wanted to know all about it, and hicks told him. and then hicks
 went on, with a serious air,
 “colonel, if you register a letter, it means that it is of value, doesn’t
 it? and if you pay fifteen cents for registering it, the government will
 have to take extra care of it and even pay you back its full value if it
 is lost. isn’t that so?”
 “yes. i suppose it’s so.”.
 “well senator balloon put fifteen cents worth of stamps on each of those
 seven huge boxes of old clothes, and shipped that ton of second-hand
 rubbish, old boots and pantaloons and what not through the mails as
 registered matter! it was an ingenious thing and it had a genuine touch of
 humor about it, too. i think there is more real talent among our public
 men of to-day than there was among those of old times—a far more
 fertile fancy, a much happier ingenuity. now, colonel, can you picture
 jefferson, or washington or john adams franking their wardrobes through
 the mails and adding the facetious idea of making the government
 responsible for the cargo for the sum of one dollar and five cents?
 statesmen were dull creatures in those days. i have a much greater
 admiration for senator balloon.”
 “yes, balloon is a man of parts, there is no denying it”
 “i think so. he is spoken of for the post of minister to china, or
 austria, and i hope will be appointed. what we want abroad is good
 examples of the national character.
 “john jay and benjamin franklin were well enough in their day, but the
 nation has made progress since then. balloon is a man we know and can
 depend on to be true to himself.”
 “yes, and balloon has had a good deal of public experience. he is an old
 friend of mine. he was governor of one of the territories a while, and was
 very satisfactory.”
 “indeed he was. he was ex-officio indian agent, too. many a man would have
 taken the indian appropriation and devoted the money to feeding and
 clothing the helpless savages, whose land had been taken from them by the
 white man in the interests of civilization; but balloon knew their needs
 better. he built a government saw-mill on the reservation with the money,
 and the lumber sold for enormous prices—a relative of his did all
 the work free of charge—that is to say he charged nothing more than
 the lumber would bring.” “but the poor injuns—not that i care much
 for injuns—what did he do for them?”
 “gave them the outside slabs to fence in the reservation with. governor
 balloon was nothing less than a father to the poor indians. but balloon is
 not alone, we have many truly noble statesmen in our country’s service
 like balloon. the senate is full of them. don’t you think so colonel?”
 “well, i dunno. i honor my country’s public servants as much as any one
 can. i meet them, sir, every day, and the more i see of them the more i
 esteem them and the more grateful i am that our institutions give us the
 opportunity of securing their services. few lands are so blest.”
 “that is true, colonel. to be sure you can buy now and then a senator or a
 representative but they do not know it is wrong, and so they are not
 ashamed of it. they are gentle, and confiding and childlike, and in my
 opinion these are qualities that ennoble them far more than any amount of
 sinful sagacity could. i quite agree with you, col. sellers.”
 “well”—hesitated the colonel—“i am afraid some of them do buy
 their seats—yes, i am afraid they do—but as senator dilworthy
 himself said to me, it is sinful,—it is very wrong—it is
 shameful; heaven protect me from such a charge. that is what dilworthy
 said. and yet when you come to look at it you cannot deny that we would
 have to go without the services of some of our ablest men, sir, if the
 country were opposed to—to—bribery. it is a harsh term. i do
 not like to use it.”
 the colonel interrupted himself at this point to meet an engagement with
 the austrian minister, and took his leave with his usual courtly bow.
 in due time laura alighted at the book store, and began to look at the
 titles of the handsome array of books on the counter. a dapper clerk of
 perhaps nineteen or twenty years, with hair accurately parted and
 surprisingly slick, came bustling up and leaned over with a pretty smile
 and an affable—
 “can i—was there any particular book you wished to see?”
 “have you taine’s england?”
 “beg pardon?”
 “taine’s notes on england.”
 the young gentleman scratched the side of his nose with a cedar pencil
 which he took down from its bracket on the side of his head, and reflected
 a moment:
 “ah—i see,” [with a bright smile]—“train, you mean—not
 taine. george francis train. no, ma’m we—”
 “i mean taine—if i may take the liberty.”
 the clerk reflected again—then:
 “taine . . . . taine . . . . is it hymns?”
 “no, it isn’t hymns. it is a volume that is making a deal of talk just
 now, and is very widely known—except among parties who sell it.”
 the clerk glanced at her face to see if a sarcasm might not lurk somewhere
 in that obscure speech, but the gentle simplicity of the beautiful eyes
 that met his, banished that suspicion. he went away and conferred with the
 proprietor. both appeared to be non-plussed. they thought and talked, and
 talked and thought by turns. then both came forward and the proprietor
 said:
 “is it an american book, ma’m?”
 “no, it is an american reprint of an english translation.”
 “oh! yes—yes—i remember, now. we are expecting it every day.
 it isn’t out yet.”
 “i think you must be mistaken, because you advertised it a week ago.”
 “why no—can that be so?”
 “yes, i am sure of it. and besides, here is the book itself, on the
 counter.”
 she bought it and the proprietor retired from the field. then she asked
 the clerk for the autocrat of the breakfast table—and was pained to
 see the admiration her beauty had inspired in him fade out of his face. he
 said with cold dignity, that cook books were somewhat out of their line,
 but he would order it if she desired it. she said, no, never mind. then
 she fell to conning the titles again, finding a delight in the inspection
 of the hawthornes, the longfellows, the tennysons, and other favorites of
 her idle hours. meantime the clerk’s eyes were busy, and no doubt his
 admiration was returning again—or may be he was only gauging her
 probable literary tastes by some sagacious system of admeasurement only
 known to his guild. now he began to “assist” her in making a selection;
 but his efforts met with no success—indeed they only annoyed her and
 unpleasantly interrupted her meditations. presently, while she was holding
 a copy of “venetian life” in her hand and running over a familiar passage
 here and there, the clerk said, briskly, snatching up a paper-covered
 volume and striking the counter a smart blow with it to dislodge the dust:
 “now here is a work that we’ve sold a lot of. everybody that’s read it
 likes it”—and he intruded it under her nose; “it’s a book that i can
 recommend—‘the pirate’s doom, or the last of the buccaneers.’ i
 think it’s one of the best things that’s come out this season.”
 laura pushed it gently aside with her hand and went on and went on
 filching from “venetian life.”
 “i believe i do not want it,” she said.
 the clerk hunted around awhile, glancing at one title and then another,
 but apparently not finding what he wanted.
 however, he succeeded at last. said he:
 “have you ever read this, ma’m? i am sure you’ll like it. it’s by the
 author of ‘the hooligans of hackensack.’ it is full of love troubles and
 mysteries and all sorts of such things. the heroine strangles her own
 mother. just glance at the title please,—‘gonderil the vampire, or
 the dance of death.’ and here is ‘the jokist’s own treasury, or, the
 phunny phellow’s bosom phriend.’ the funniest thing!—i’ve read it
 four times, ma’m, and i can laugh at the very sight of it yet. and
 ‘gonderil,’—i assure you it is the most splendid book i ever read. i
 know you will like these books, ma’m, because i’ve read them myself and i
 know what they are.”
 “oh, i was perplexed—but i see how it is, now. you must have thought
 i asked you to tell me what sort of books i wanted—for i am apt to
 say things which i don’t really mean, when i am absent minded. i suppose i
 did ask you, didn’t i?”
 “no ma’m,—but i—”
 “yes, i must have done it, else you would not have offered your services,
 for fear it might be rude. but don’t be troubled—it was all my
 fault. i ought not to have been so heedless—i ought not to have
 asked you.”
 “but you didn’t ask me, ma’m. we always help customers all we can. you see
 our experience—living right among books all the time—that sort
 of thing makes us able to help a customer make a selection, you know.”
 “now does it, indeed? it is part of your business, then?”
 “yes’m, we always help.”
 “how good it is of you. some people would think it rather obtrusive,
 perhaps, but i don’t—i think it is real kindness—even charity.
 some people jump to conclusions without any thought—you have noticed
 that?”
 “o yes,” said the clerk, a little perplexed as to whether to feel
 comfortable or the reverse; “oh yes, indeed, i’ve often noticed that,
 ma’m.”
 “yes, they jump to conclusions with an absurd heedlessness. now some
 people would think it odd that because you, with the budding tastes and
 the innocent enthusiasms natural to your time of life, enjoyed the
 vampires and the volume of nursery jokes, you should imagine that an older
 person would delight in them too—but i do not think it odd at all. i
 think it natural—perfectly natural in you. and kind, too. you look
 like a person who not only finds a deep pleasure in any little thing in
 the way of literature that strikes you forcibly, but is willing and glad
 to share that pleasure with others—and that, i think, is noble and
 admirable—very noble and admirable. i think we ought all to share
 our pleasures with others, and do what we can to make each other happy, do
 not you?”
 “oh, yes. oh, yes, indeed. yes, you are quite right, ma’m.”
 but he was getting unmistakably uncomfortable, now, notwithstanding
 laura’s confiding sociability and almost affectionate tone.
 “yes, indeed. many people would think that what a bookseller—or
 perhaps his clerk—knows about literature as literature, in
 contradistinction to its character as merchandise, would hardly, be of
 much assistance to a person—that is, to an adult, of course—in
 the selection of food for the mind—except of course wrapping paper,
 or twine, or wafers, or something like that—but i never feel that
 way. i feel that whatever service you offer me, you offer with a good
 heart, and i am as grateful for it as if it were the greatest boon to me.
 and it is useful to me—it is bound to be so. it cannot be otherwise.
 if you show me a book which you have read—not skimmed over or merely
 glanced at, but read—and you tell me that you enjoyed it and that
 you could read it three or four times, then i know what book i want—”
 “thank you!—th—”
 —“to avoid. yes indeed. i think that no information ever comes amiss
 in this world. once or twice i have traveled in the cars—and there
 you know, the peanut boy always measures you with his eye, and hands you
 out a book of murders if you are fond of theology; or tupper or a
 dictionary or t. s. arthur if you are fond of poetry; or he hands you a
 volume of distressing jokes or a copy of the american miscellany if you
 particularly dislike that sort of literary fatty degeneration of the heart—just
 for the world like a pleasant spoken well-meaning gentleman in any
 bookstore. but here i am running on as if business men had nothing to do
 but listen to women talk. you must pardon me, for i was not thinking.—and
 you must let me thank you again for helping me. i read a good deal, and
 shall be in nearly every day and i would be sorry to have you think me a
 customer who talks too much and buys too little. might i ask you to give
 me the time? ah-two-twenty-two. thank you very much. i will set mine while
 i have the opportunity.”
 but she could not get her watch open, apparently. she tried, and tried
 again. then the clerk, trembling at his own audacity, begged to be allowed
 to assist. she allowed him. he succeeded, and was radiant under the sweet
 influences of her pleased face and her seductively worded acknowledgements
 with gratification. then he gave her the exact time again, and anxiously
 watched her turn the hands slowly till they reached the precise spot
 without accident or loss of life, and then he looked as happy as a man who
 had helped a fellow being through a momentous undertaking, and was
 grateful to know that he had not lived in vain. laura thanked him once
 more. the words were music to his ear; but what were they compared to the
 ravishing smile with which she flooded his whole system? when she bowed
 her adieu and turned away, he was no longer suffering torture in the
 pillory where she had had him trussed up during so many distressing
 moments, but he belonged to the list of her conquests and was a flattered
 and happy thrall, with the dawn-light of love breaking over the eastern
 elevations of his heart.
 it was about the hour, now, for the chairman of the house committee on
 benevolent appropriations to make his appearance, and laura stepped to the
 door to reconnoiter. she glanced up the street, and sure enough—
 that chairman was nowhere in sight. such disappointments seldom occur in
 novels, but are always happening in real life.
 she was obliged to make a new plan. she sent him a note, and asked him to
 call in the evening—which he did.
 she received the hon. mr. buckstone with a sunny smile, and said:
 “i don’t know how i ever dared to send you a note, mr. buckstone, for you
 have the reputation of not being very partial to our sex.”
 “why i am sure my reputation does me wrong, then, miss hawkins. i have
 been married once—is that nothing in my favor?”
 “oh, yes—that is, it may be and it may not be. if you have known
 what perfection is in woman, it is fair to argue that inferiority cannot
 interest you now.”
 “even if that were the case it could not affect you, miss hawkins,” said
 the chairman gallantly. “fame does not place you in the list of ladies who
 rank below perfection.” this happy speech delighted mr. buckstone as much
 as it seemed to delight laura. but it did not confuse him as much as it
 apparently did her.
 “i wish in all sincerity that i could be worthy of such a felicitous
 compliment as that. but i am a woman, and so i am gratified for it just as
 it is, and would not have it altered.”
 “but it is not merely a compliment—that is, an empty complement—it
 is the truth. all men will endorse that.”
 laura looked pleased, and said:
 “it is very kind of you to say it. it is a distinction indeed, for a
 country-bred girl like me to be so spoken of by people of brains and
 culture. you are so kind that i know you will pardon my putting you to the
 trouble to come this evening.”
 “indeed it was no trouble. it was a pleasure. i am alone in the world
 since i lost my wife, and i often long for the society of your sex, miss
 hawkins, notwithstanding what people may say to the contrary.”
 “it is pleasant to hear you say that. i am sure it must be so. if i feel
 lonely at times, because of my exile from old friends, although surrounded
 by new ones who are already very dear to me, how much more lonely must you
 feel, bereft as you are, and with no wholesome relief from the cares of
 state that weigh you down. for your own sake, as well as for the sake of
 others, you ought to go into society oftener. i seldom see you at a
 reception, and when i do you do not usually give me very much of your
 attention.”
 “i never imagined that you wished it or i would have been very glad to
 make myself happy in that way.—but one seldom gets an opportunity to
 say more than a sentence to you in a place like that. you are always the
 centre of a group—a fact which you may have noticed yourself. but if
 one might come here—”
 “indeed you would always find a hearty welcome, mr. buckstone. i have
 often wished you would come and tell me more about cairo and the pyramids,
 as you once promised me you would.”
 “why, do you remember that yet, miss hawkins? i thought ladies’ memories
 were more fickle than that.”
 “oh, they are not so fickle as gentlemen’s promises. and besides, if i had
 been inclined to forget, i—did you not give me something by way of a
 remembrancer?”
 “did i?”
 “think.”
 “it does seem to me that i did; but i have forgotten what it was now.”
 “never, never call a lady’s memory fickle again! do you recognize this?”
 “a little spray of box! i am beaten—i surrender. but have you kept
 that all this time?”
 laura’s confusion was very pretty. she tried to hide it, but the more she
 tried the more manifest it became and withal the more captivating to look
 upon. presently she threw the spray of box from her with an annoyed air,
 and said:
 “i forgot myself. i have been very foolish. i beg that you will forget
 this absurd thing.”
 mr. buckstone picked up the spray, and sitting down by laura’s side on the
 sofa, said:
 “please let me keep it, miss hawkins. i set a very high value upon it
 now.”
 “give it to me, mr. buckstone, and do not speak so. i have been
 sufficiently punished for my thoughtlessness. you cannot take pleasure in
 adding to my distress. please give it to me.”
 “indeed i do not wish to distress you. but do not consider the matter so
 gravely; you have done yourself no wrong. you probably forgot that you had
 it; but if you had given it to me i would have kept it—and not
 forgotten it.”
 “do not talk so, mr. buckstone. give it to me, please, and forget the
 matter.”
 “it would not be kind to refuse, since it troubles you so, and so i
 restore it. but if you would give me part of it and keep the rest—”
 “so that you might have something to remind you of me when you wished to
 laugh at my foolishness?”
 “oh, by no means, no! simply that i might remember that i had once
 assisted to discomfort you, and be reminded to do so no more.”
 laura looked up, and scanned his face a moment. she was about to break the
 twig, but she hesitated and said:
 “if i were sure that you—” she threw the spray away, and continued:
 “this is silly! we will change the subject. no, do not insist—i must
 have my way in this.”
 then mr. buckstone drew off his forces and proceeded to make a wily
 advance upon the fortress under cover of carefully-contrived artifices and
 stratagems of war. but he contended with an alert and suspicious enemy;
 and so at the end of two hours it was manifest to him that he had made but
 little progress. still, he had made some; he was sure of that.
 laura sat alone and communed with herself;
 “he is fairly hooked, poor thing. i can play him at my leisure and land
 him when i choose. he was all ready to be caught, days and days ago—i
 saw that, very well. he will vote for our bill—no fear about that;
 and moreover he will work for it, too, before i am done with him. if he
 had a woman’s eyes he would have noticed that the spray of box had grown
 three inches since he first gave it to me, but a man never sees anything
 and never suspects. if i had shown him a whole bush he would have thought
 it was the same. well, it is a good night’s work: the committee is safe.
 but this is a desperate game i am playing in these days—a wearing,
 sordid, heartless game. if i lose, i lose everything—even myself.
 and if i win the game, will it be worth its cost after all? i do not know.
 sometimes i doubt. sometimes i half wish i had not begun. but no matter; i
 have begun, and i will never turn back; never while i live.”
 mr. buckstone indulged in a reverie as he walked homeward:
 “she is shrewd and deep, and plays her cards with considerable discretion—but
 she will lose, for all that. there is no hurry; i shall come out winner,
 all in good time. she is the most beautiful woman in the world; and she
 surpassed herself to-night. i suppose i must vote for that bill, in the
 end maybe; but that is not a matter of much consequence the government can
 stand it. she is bent on capturing me, that is plain; but she will find by
 and by that what she took for a sleeping garrison was an ambuscade.”
 now this surprising news caus’d her fall in ’a trance, life
 as she were dead, no limbs she could advance, then her dear brother
 came, her from the ground he took and she spake up and said, o my
 poor heart is broke. the
 barnardcastle tragedy.
 “don’t you think he is distinguished looking?”
 “what! that gawky looking person, with miss hawkins?”
 “there. he’s just speaking to mrs. schoonmaker. such high-bred negligence
 and unconsciousness. nothing studied. see his fine eyes.”
 “very. they are moving this way now. maybe he is coming here. but he looks
 as helpless as a rag baby. who is he, blanche?”
 “who is he? and you’ve been here a week, grace, and don’t know? he’s the
 catch of the season. that’s washington hawkins—her brother.”
 “no, is it?”
 “very old family, old kentucky family i believe. he’s got enormous landed
 property in tennessee, i think. the family lost everything, slaves and
 that sort of thing, you know, in the war. but they have a great deal of
 land, minerals, mines and all that. mr. hawkins and his sister too are
 very much interested in the amelioration of the condition of the colored
 race; they have some plan, with senator dilworthy, to convert a large part
 of their property to something another for the freedmen.”
 “you don’t say so? i thought he was some guy from pennsylvania. but he is
 different from others. probably he has lived all his life on his
 plantation.”
 it was a day reception of mrs. representative schoonmaker, a sweet woman,
 of simple and sincere manners. her house was one of the most popular in
 washington. there was less ostentation there than in some others, and
 people liked to go where the atmosphere reminded them of the peace and
 purity of home. mrs. schoonmaker was as natural and unaffected in
 washington society as she was in her own new york house, and kept up the
 spirit of home-life there, with her husband and children. and that was the
 reason, probably, why people of refinement liked to go there.
 washington is a microcosm, and one can suit himself with any sort of
 society within a radius of a mile. to a large portion of the people who
 frequent washington or dwell there, the ultra fashion, the shoddy, the
 jobbery are as utterly distasteful as they would be in a refined new
 england city. schoonmaker was not exactly a leader in the house, but he
 was greatly respected for his fine talents and his honesty. no one would
 have thought of offering to carry national improvement directors relief
 stock for him.
 these day receptions were attended by more women than men, and those
 interested in the problem might have studied the costumes of the ladies
 present, in view of this fact, to discover whether women dress more for
 the eyes of women or for effect upon men. it is a very important problem,
 and has been a good deal discussed, and its solution would form one fixed,
 philosophical basis, upon which to estimate woman’s character. we are
 inclined to take a medium ground, and aver that woman dresses to please
 herself, and in obedience to a law of her own nature.
 “they are coming this way,” said blanche. people who made way for them to
 pass, turned to look at them. washington began to feel that the eyes of
 the public were on him also, and his eyes rolled about, now towards the
 ceiling, now towards the floor, in an effort to look unconscious.
 “good morning, miss hawkins. delighted. mr. hawkins. my friend, miss
 medlar.”
 mr. hawkins, who was endeavoring to square himself for a bow, put his foot
 through the train of mrs. senator poplin, who looked round with a scowl,
 which turned into a smile as she saw who it was. in extricating himself,
 mr. hawkins, who had the care of his hat as well as the introduction on
 his mind, shambled against miss blanche, who said pardon, with the
 prettiest accent, as if the awkwardness were her own. and mr. hawkins
 righted himself.
 “don’t you find it very warm to-day, mr. hawkins?” said blanche, by way of
 a remark.
 “it’s awful hot,” said washington.
 “it’s warm for the season,” continued blanche pleasantly. “but i suppose
 you are accustomed to it,” she added, with a general idea that the
 thermometer always stands at  deg. in all parts of the late slave
 states. “washington weather generally cannot be very congenial to you?”
 “it’s congenial,” said washington brightening up, “when it’s not
 congealed.”
 “that’s very good. did you hear, grace, mr. hawkins says it’s congenial
 when it’s not congealed.”
 “what is, dear?” said grace, who was talking with laura.
 the conversation was now finely under way. washington launched out an
 observation of his own.
 “did you see those japs, miss leavitt?”
 “oh, yes, aren’t they queer. but so high-bred, so picturesque. do you
 think that color makes any difference, mr. hawkins? i used to be so
 prejudiced against color.”
 “did you? i never was. i used to think my old mammy was handsome.”
 “how interesting your life must have been! i should like to hear about
 it.”
 washington was about settling himself into his narrative style, when mrs.
 gen. mcfingal caught his eye.
 “have you been at the capitol to-day, mr. hawkins?”
 washington had not. “is anything uncommon going on?”
 “they say it was very exciting. the alabama business you know. gen.
 sutler, of massachusetts, defied england, and they say he wants war.”
 “he wants to make himself conspicuous more like,” said laura. “he always,
 you have noticed, talks with one eye on the gallery, while the other is on
 the speaker.”
 “well, my husband says, its nonsense to talk of war, and wicked. he knows
 what war is. if we do have war, i hope it will be for the patriots of
 cuba. don’t you think we want cuba, mr. hawkins?”
 “i think we want it bad,” said washington. “and santo domingo. senator
 dilworthy says, we are bound to extend our religion over the isles of the
 sea. we’ve got to round out our territory, and—”
 washington’s further observations were broken off by laura, who whisked
 him off to another part of the room, and reminded him that they must make
 their adieux.
 “how stupid and tiresome these people are,” she said. “let’s go.”
 they were turning to say good-by to the hostess, when laura’s attention
 was arrested by the sight of a gentleman who was just speaking to mrs.
 schoonmaker. for a second her heart stopped beating. he was a handsome man
 of forty and perhaps more, with grayish hair and whiskers, and he walked
 with a cane, as if he were slightly lame. he might be less than forty, for
 his face was worn into hard lines, and he was pale.
 no. it could not be, she said to herself. it is only a resemblance. but as
 the gentleman turned and she saw his full face, laura put out her hand and
 clutched washington’s arm to prevent herself from falling.
 washington, who was not minding anything, as usual, looked ’round in
 wonder. laura’s eyes were blazing fire and hatred; he had never seen her
 look so before; and her face, was livid.
 “why, what is it, sis? your face is as white as paper.”
 “it’s he, it’s he. come, come,” and she dragged him away.
 “it’s who?” asked washington, when they had gained the carriage.
 “it’s nobody, it’s nothing. did i say he? i was faint with the heat. don’t
 mention it. don’t you speak of it,” she added earnestly, grasping his arm.
 when she had gained her room she went to the glass and saw a pallid and
 haggard face.
 “my god,” she cried, “this will never do. i should have killed him, if i
 could. the scoundrel still lives, and dares to come here. i ought to kill
 him. he has no right to live. how i hate him. and yet i loved him. oh
 heavens, how i did love that man. and why didn’t he kill me? he might
 better. he did kill all that was good in me. oh, but he shall not escape.
 he shall not escape this time. he may have forgotten. he will find that a
 woman’s hate doesn’t forget. the law? what would the law do but protect
 him and make me an outcast? how all washington would gather up its
 virtuous skirts and avoid me, if it knew. i wonder if he hates me as i do
 him?”
 so laura raved, in tears and in rage by turns, tossed in a tumult of
 passion, which she gave way to with little effort to control.
 a servant came to summon her to dinner. she had a headache. the hour came
 for the president’s reception. she had a raving headache, and the senator
 must go without her.
 that night of agony was like another night she recalled. how vividly it
 all came back to her. and at that time she remembered she thought she
 might be mistaken. he might come back to her. perhaps he loved her, a
 little, after all. now, she knew he did not. now, she knew he was a
 cold-blooded scoundrel, without pity. never a word in all these years. she
 had hoped he was dead. did his wife live, she wondered. she caught at that—and
 it gave a new current to her thoughts. perhaps, after all—she must
 see him. she could not live without seeing him. would he smile as in the
 old days when she loved him so; or would he sneer as when she last saw
 him? if he looked so, she hated him. if he should call her “laura,
 darling,” and look so! she must find him. she must end her doubts.
 laura kept her room for two days, on one excuse and another—a
 nervous headache, a cold—to the great anxiety of the senator’s
 household. callers, who went away, said she had been too gay—they
 did not say “fast,” though some of them may have thought it. one so
 conspicuous and successful in society as laura could not be out of the way
 two days, without remarks being made, and not all of them complimentary.
 when she came down she appeared as usual, a little pale may be, but
 unchanged in manner. if there were any deepened lines about the eyes they
 had been concealed. her course of action was quite determined.
 at breakfast she asked if any one had heard any unusual noise during the
 night? nobody had. washington never heard any noise of any kind after his
 eyes were shut. some people thought he never did when they were open
 either.
 senator dilworthy said he had come in late. he was detained in a little
 consultation after the congressional prayer meeting. perhaps it was his
 entrance.
 no, laura said. she heard that. it was later. she might have been nervous,
 but she fancied somebody was trying to get into the house.
 mr. brierly humorously suggested that it might be, as none of the members
 were occupied in night session.
 the senator frowned, and said he did not like to hear that kind of
 newspaper slang. there might be burglars about.
 laura said that very likely it was only her nervousness. but she thought
 she would feel safer if washington would let her take one of his pistols.
 washington brought her one of his revolvers, and instructed her in the art
 of loading and firing it.
 during the morning laura drove down to mrs. schoonmaker’s to pay a
 friendly call.
 “your receptions are always delightful,” she said to that lady, “the
 pleasant people all seem to come here.”
 “it’s pleasant to hear you say so, miss hawkins. i believe my friends like
 to come here. though society in washington is mixed; we have a little of
 everything.”
 “i suppose, though, you don’t see much of the old rebel element?” said
 laura with a smile.
 if this seemed to mrs. schoonmaker a singular remark for a lady to make,
 who was meeting “rebels” in society every day, she did not express it in
 any way, but only said,
 “you know we don’t say ‘rebel’ anymore. before we came to washington i
 thought rebels would look unlike other people. i find we are very much
 alike, and that kindness and good nature wear away prejudice. and then you
 know there are all sorts of common interests. my husband sometimes says
 that he doesn’t see but confederates are just as eager to get at the
 treasury as unionists. you know that mr. schoonmaker is on the
 appropriations.”
 “does he know many southerners?”
 “oh, yes. there were several at my reception the other day. among others a
 confederate colonel—a stranger—handsome man with gray hair,
 probably you didn’t notice him, uses a cane in walking. a very agreeable
 man. i wondered why he called. when my husband came home and looked over
 the cards, he said he had a cotton claim. a real southerner. perhaps you
 might know him if i could think of his name. yes, here’s his card—louisiana.”
 laura took the card, looked at it intently till she was sure of the
 address, and then laid it down, with,
 “no, he is no friend of ours.”
 that afternoon, laura wrote and dispatched the following note. it was in a
 round hand, unlike her flowing style, and it was directed to a number and
 street in georgetown:—
 “a lady at senator dilworthy’s would like to see col. george selby, on
 business connected with the cotton claims. can he call wednesday at
 three o’clock p. m.?”
 on wednesday at  p. m, no one of the family was likely to be in the house
 except laura.
 col. selby had just come to washington, and taken lodgings in georgetown.
 his business was to get pay for some cotton that was destroyed during the
 war. there were many others in washington on the same errand, some of them
 with claims as difficult to establish as his. a concert of action was
 necessary, and he was not, therefore, at all surprised to receive the note
 from a lady asking him to call at senator dilworthy’s.
 at a little after three on wednesday he rang the bell of the senator’s
 residence. it was a handsome mansion on the square opposite the
 president’s house. the owner must be a man of great wealth, the colonel
 thought; perhaps, who knows, said he with a smile, he may have got some of
 my cotton in exchange for salt and quinine after the capture of new
 orleans. as this thought passed through his mind he was looking at the
 remarkable figure of the hero of new orleans, holding itself by main
 strength from sliding off the back of the rearing bronze horse, and
 lifting its hat in the manner of one who acknowledges the playing of that
 martial air: “see, the conquering hero comes!” “gad,” said the colonel to
 himself, “old hickory ought to get down and give his seat to gen. sutler—but
 they’d have to tie him on.”
 laura was in the drawing room. she heard the bell, she heard the steps in
 the hall, and the emphatic thud of the supporting cane. she had risen from
 her chair and was leaning against the piano, pressing her left hand
 against the violent beating of her heart. the door opened and the colonel
 entered, standing in the full light of the opposite window. laura was more
 in the shadow and stood for an instant, long enough for the colonel to
 make the inward observation that she was a magnificent woman. she then
 advanced a step.
 “col. selby, is it not?”
 the colonel staggered back, caught himself by a chair, and turned towards
 her a look of terror.
 “laura? my god!”
 “yes, your wife!”
 “oh, no, it can’t be. how came you here? i thought you were—”
 “you thought i was dead? you thought you were rid of me? not so long as
 you live, col. selby, not so long as you live,” laura in her passion was
 hurried on to say.
 no man had ever accused col. selby of cowardice. but he was a coward
 before this woman. may be he was not the man he once was. where was his
 coolness? where was his sneering, imperturbable manner, with which he
 could have met, and would have met, any woman he had wronged, if he had
 only been forewarned. he felt now that he must temporize, that he must
 gain time. there was danger in laura’s tone. there was something frightful
 in her calmness. her steady eyes seemed to devour him.
 “you have ruined my life,” she said; “and i was so young, so ignorant, and
 loved you so. you betrayed me, and left me, mocking me and trampling me
 into the dust, a soiled cast-off. you might better have killed me then.
 then i should not have hated you.”
 “laura,” said the colonel, nerving himself, but still pale, and speaking
 appealingly, “don’t say that. reproach me. i deserve it. i was a
 scoundrel. i was everything monstrous. but your beauty made me crazy. you
 are right. i was a brute in leaving you as i did. but what could i do? i
 was married, and—”
 “and your wife still lives?” asked laura, bending a little forward in her
 eagerness.
 the colonel noticed the action, and he almost said “no,” but he thought of
 the folly of attempting concealment.
 “yes. she is here.”
 what little color had wandered back into laura’s face forsook it again.
 her heart stood still, her strength seemed going from her limbs. her last
 hope was gone. the room swam before her for a moment, and the colonel
 stepped towards her, but she waved him back, as hot anger again coursed
 through her veins, and said,
 “and you dare come with her, here, and tell me of it, here and mock me
 with it! and you think i will have it; george? you think i will let you
 live with that woman? you think i am as powerless as that day i fell dead
 at your feet?”
 she raged now. she was in a tempest of excitement. and she advanced
 towards him with a threatening mien. she would kill me if she could,
 thought the colonel; but he thought at the same moment, how beautiful she
 is. he had recovered his head now. she was lovely when he knew her, then a
 simple country girl. now she was dazzling, in the fullness of ripe
 womanhood, a superb creature, with all the fascination that a woman of the
 world has for such a man as col. selby. nothing of this was lost on him.
 he stepped quickly to her, grasped both her hands in his, and said,
 “laura, stop! think! suppose i loved you yet! suppose i hated my fate!
 what can i do? i am broken by the war. i have lost everything almost. i
 had as lief be dead and done with it.”
 the colonel spoke with a low remembered voice that thrilled through laura.
 he was looking into her eyes as he had looked in those old days, when no
 birds of all those that sang in the groves where they walked sang a note
 of warning. he was wounded. he had been punished. her strength forsook her
 with her rage, and she sank upon a chair, sobbing,
 “oh! my god, i thought i hated him!”
 the colonel knelt beside her. he took her hand and she let him keep it.
 she looked down into his face, with a pitiable tenderness, and said in a
 weak voice.
 “and you do love me a little?”
 the colonel vowed and protested. he kissed her hand and her lips. he swore
 his false soul into perdition.
 she wanted love, this woman. was not her love for george selby deeper than
 any other woman’s could be? had she not a right to him? did he not belong
 to her by virtue of her overmastering passion? his wife—she was not
 his wife, except by the law. she could not be. even with the law she could
 have no right to stand between two souls that were one. it was an infamous
 condition in society that george should be tied to her.
 laura thought this, believed it; because she desired to believe it. she
 came to it as an original proposition founded on the requirements of her
 own nature. she may have heard, doubtless she had, similar theories that
 were prevalent at that day, theories of the tyranny of marriage and of the
 freedom of marriage. she had even heard women lecturers say, that marriage
 should only continue so long as it pleased either party to it—for a
 year, or a month, or a day. she had not given much heed to this, but she
 saw its justice now in a dash of revealing desire. it must be right. god
 would not have permitted her to love george selby as she did, and him to
 love her, if it was right for society to raise up a barrier between them.
 he belonged to her. had he not confessed it himself?
 not even the religious atmosphere of senator dilworthy’s house had been
 sufficient to instill into laura that deep christian principle which had
 been somehow omitted in her training. indeed in that very house had she
 not heard women, prominent before the country and besieging congress,
 utter sentiments that fully justified the course she was marking out for
 herself.
 they were seated now, side by side, talking with more calmness. laura was
 happy, or thought she was. but it was that feverish sort of happiness
 which is snatched out of the black shadow of falsehood, and is at the
 moment recognized as fleeting and perilous, and indulged tremblingly. she
 loved. she was loved. that is happiness certainly. and the black past and
 the troubled present and the uncertain future could not snatch that from
 her.
 what did they say as they sat there? what nothings do people usually say
 in such circumstances, even if they are three-score and ten? it was enough
 for laura to hear his voice and be near him. it was enough for him to be
 near her, and avoid committing himself as much as he could. enough for him
 was the present also. had there not always been some way out of such
 scrapes?
 and yet laura could not be quite content without prying into tomorrow. how
 could the colonel manage to free himself from his wife? would it be long?
 could he not go into some state where it would not take much time? he
 could not say exactly. that they must think of. that they must talk over.
 and so on. did this seem like a damnable plot to laura against the life,
 maybe, of a sister, a woman like herself? probably not. it was right that
 this man should be hers, and there were some obstacles in the way. that
 was all. there are as good reasons for bad actions as for good ones,—to
 those who commit them. when one has broken the tenth commandment, the
 others are not of much account.
 was it unnatural, therefore, that when george selby departed, laura should
 watch him from the window, with an almost joyful heart as he went down the
 sunny square? “i shall see him to-morrow,” she said, “and the next day,
 and the next. he is mine now.”
 “damn the woman,” said the colonel as he picked his way down the steps.
 “or,” he added, as his thoughts took a new turn, “i wish my wife was in
 new orleans.”
 open your ears; for which of you will stop, the vent of
 hearing when loud rumor speaks? i, from the orient to the drooping
 west, making the wind my post-horse, still unfold the acts
 commenced on this ball of earth: upon my tongues continual slanders
 ride; the which in every language i pronounce, stuffing the
 ears of men with false reports. king henry iv.
 as may be readily believed, col. beriah sellers was by this time one of
 the best known men in washington. for the first time in his life his
 talents had a fair field.
 he was now at the centre of the manufacture of gigantic schemes, of
 speculations of all sorts, of political and social gossip. the atmosphere
 was full of little and big rumors and of vast, undefined expectations.
 everybody was in haste, too, to push on his private plan, and feverish in
 his haste, as if in constant apprehension that tomorrow would be judgment
 day. work while congress is in session, said the uneasy spirit, for in the
 recess there is no work and no device.
 the colonel enjoyed this bustle and confusion amazingly; he thrived in the
 air of indefinite expectation. all his own schemes took larger shape and
 more misty and majestic proportions; and in this congenial air, the
 colonel seemed even to himself to expand into something large and
 mysterious. if he respected himself before, he almost worshipped beriah
 sellers now, as a superior being. if he could have chosen an official
 position out of the highest, he would have been embarrassed in the
 selection. the presidency of the republic seemed too limited and cramped
 in the constitutional restrictions. if he could have been grand llama of
 the united states, that might have come the nearest to his idea of a
 position. and next to that he would have luxuriated in the irresponsible
 omniscience of the special correspondent.
 col. sellers knew the president very well, and had access to his presence
 when officials were kept cooling their heels in the waiting-room. the
 president liked to hear the colonel talk, his voluble ease was a
 refreshment after the decorous dullness of men who only talked business
 and government, and everlastingly expounded their notions of justice and
 the distribution of patronage. the colonel was as much a lover of farming
 and of horses as thomas jefferson was. he talked to the president by the
 hour about his magnificent stud, and his plantation at hawkeye, a kind of
 principality—he represented it. he urged the president to pay him a
 visit during the recess, and see his stock farm.
 “the president’s table is well enough,” he used to say, to the loafers who
 gathered about him at willard’s, “well enough for a man on a salary, but
 god bless my soul, i should like him to see a little old-fashioned
 hospitality—open house, you know. a person seeing me at home might
 think i paid no attention to what was in the house, just let things flow
 in and out. he’d be mistaken. what i look to is quality, sir. the
 president has variety enough, but the quality! vegetables of course you
 can’t expect here. i’m very particular about mine. take celery, now—there’s
 only one spot in this country where celery will grow. but i am surprised
 about the wines. i should think they were manufactured in the new york
 custom house. i must send the president some from my cellar. i was really
 mortified the other day at dinner to see blacque bey leave his standing in
 the glasses.”
 when the colonel first came to washington he had thoughts of taking the
 mission to constantinople, in order to be on the spot to look after the
 dissemination of his eye water, but as that invention; was not yet quite
 ready, the project shrank a little in the presence of vaster schemes.
 besides he felt that he could do the country more good by remaining at
 home. he was one of the southerners who were constantly quoted as heartily
 “accepting the situation.”
 “i’m whipped,” he used to say with a jolly laugh, “the government was too
 many for me; i’m cleaned out, done for, except my plantation and private
 mansion. we played for a big thing, and lost it, and i don’t whine, for
 one. i go for putting the old flag on all the vacant lots. i said to the
 president, says i, ‘grant, why don’t you take santo domingo, annex the
 whole thing, and settle the bill afterwards. that’s my way. i’d take the
 job to manage congress. the south would come into it. you’ve got to
 conciliate the south, consolidate the two debts, pay ’em off in
 greenbacks, and go ahead. that’s my notion. boutwell’s got the right
 notion about the value of paper, but he lacks courage. i should like to
 run the treasury department about six months. i’d make things plenty, and
 business look up.’”
 the colonel had access to the departments. he knew all the senators and
 representatives, and especially, the lobby. he was consequently a great
 favorite in newspaper row, and was often lounging in the offices there,
 dropping bits of private, official information, which were immediately,
 caught up and telegraphed all over the country. but it used to surprise
 even the colonel when he read it, it was embellished to that degree that
 he hardly recognized it, and the hint was not lost on him. he began to
 exaggerate his heretofore simple conversation to suit the newspaper
 demand.
 people used to wonder in the winters of - and -, where the
 “specials” got that remarkable information with which they every morning
 surprised the country, revealing the most secret intentions of the
 president and his cabinet, the private thoughts of political leaders, the
 hidden meaning of every movement. this information was furnished by col.
 sellers.
 when he was asked, afterwards, about the stolen copy of the alabama treaty
 which got into the “new york tribune,” he only looked mysterious, and said
 that neither he nor senator dilworthy knew anything about it. but those
 whom he was in the habit of meeting occasionally felt almost certain that
 he did know.
 it must not be supposed that the colonel in his general patriotic labors
 neglected his own affairs. the columbus river navigation scheme absorbed
 only a part of his time, so he was enabled to throw quite a strong reserve
 force of energy into the tennessee land plan, a vast enterprise
 commensurate with his abilities, and in the prosecution of which he was
 greatly aided by mr. henry brierly, who was buzzing about the capitol and
 the hotels day and night, and making capital for it in some mysterious
 way.
 “we must create a public opinion,” said senator dilworthy. “my only
 interest in it is a public one, and if the country wants the institution,
 congress will have to yield.”
 it may have been after a conversation between the colonel and senator
 dilworthy that the following special despatch was sent to a new york
 newspaper:
 “we understand that a philanthropic plan is on foot in relation to the
 colored race that will, if successful, revolutionize the whole character
 of southern industry. an experimental institution is in contemplation in
 tennessee which will do for that state what the industrial school at
 zurich did for switzerland. we learn that approaches have been made to
 the heirs of the late hon. silas hawkins of missouri, in reference to a
 lease of a portion of their valuable property in east tennessee. senator
 dilworthy, it is understood, is inflexibly opposed to any arrangement
 that will not give the government absolute control. private interests
 must give way to the public good. it is to be hoped that col. sellers,
 who represents the heirs, will be led to see the matter in this light.”
 when washington hawkins read this despatch, he went to the colonel in some
 anxiety. he was for a lease, he didn’t want to surrender anything. what
 did he think the government would offer? two millions?
 “may be three, may be four,” said the colonel, “it’s worth more than the
 bank of england.”
 “if they will not lease,” said washington, “let ’em make it two millions
 for an undivided half. i’m not going to throw it away, not the whole of
 it.”
 harry told the colonel that they must drive the thing through, he couldn’t
 be dallying round washington when spring opened. phil wanted him, phil had
 a great thing on hand up in pennsylvania.
 “what is that?” inquired the colonel, always ready to interest himself in
 anything large.
 “a mountain of coal; that’s all. he’s going to run a tunnel into it in the
 spring.”
 “does he want any capital?”, asked the colonel, in the tone of a man who
 is given to calculating carefully before he makes an investment.
 “no. old man bolton’s behind him. he has capital, but i judged that he
 wanted my experience in starting.”
 “if he wants me, tell him i’ll come, after congress adjourns. i should
 like to give him a little lift. he lacks enterprise—now, about that
 columbus river. he doesn’t see his chances. but he’s a good fellow, and
 you can tell him that sellers won’t go back on him.”
 “by the way,” asked harry, “who is that rather handsome party that’s
 hanging ’round laura? i see him with her everywhere, at the capitol, in
 the horse cars, and he comes to dilworthy’s. if he weren’t lame, i should
 think he was going to run off with her.”
 “oh, that’s nothing. laura knows her business. he has a cotton claim. used
 to be at hawkeye during the war.
 “selby’s his name, was a colonel. got a wife and family. very respectable
 people, the selby’s.”
 “well, that’s all right,” said harry, “if it’s business. but if a woman
 looked at me as i’ve seen her at selby, i should understand it. and it’s
 talked about, i can tell you.”
 jealousy had no doubt sharpened this young gentleman’s observation. laura
 could not have treated him with more lofty condescension if she had been
 the queen of sheba, on a royal visit to the great republic. and he
 resented it, and was “huffy” when he was with her, and ran her errands,
 and brought her gossip, and bragged of his intimacy with the lovely
 creature among the fellows at newspaper row.
 laura’s life was rushing on now in the full stream of intrigue and
 fashionable dissipation. she was conspicuous at the balls of the fastest
 set, and was suspected of being present at those doubtful suppers that
 began late and ended early. if senator dilworthy remonstrated about
 appearances, she had a way of silencing him. perhaps she had some hold on
 him, perhaps she was necessary to his plan for ameliorating the condition
 of the colored race.
 she saw col. selby, when the public knew and when it did not know. she
 would see him, whatever excuses he made, and however he avoided her. she
 was urged on by a fever of love and hatred and jealousy, which alternately
 possessed her. sometimes she petted him, and coaxed him and tried all her
 fascinations. and again she threatened him and reproached him. what was he
 doing? why had he taken no steps to free himself? why didn’t he send his
 wife home? she should have money soon. they could go to europe—anywhere.
 what did she care for talk?
 and he promised, and lied, and invented fresh excuses for delay, like a
 cowardly gambler and roue as he was, fearing to break with her, and half
 the time unwilling to give her up.
 “that woman doesn’t know what fear is,” he said to himself, “and she
 watches me like a hawk.”
 he told his wife that this woman was a lobbyist, whom he had to tolerate
 and use in getting through his claims, and that he should pay her and have
 done with her, when he succeeded.
 henry brierly was at the dilworthy’s constantly and on such terms of
 intimacy that he came and went without question. the senator was not an
 inhospitable man, he liked to have guests in his house, and harry’s gay
 humor and rattling way entertained him; for even the most devout men and
 busy statesmen must have hours of relaxation.
 harry himself believed that he was of great service in the university
 business, and that the success of the scheme depended upon him to a great
 degree. he spent many hours in talking it over with the senator after
 dinner. he went so far as to consider whether it would be worth his while
 to take the professorship of civil engineering in the new institution.
 but it was not the senator’s society nor his dinners—at which this
 scapegrace remarked that there was too much grace and too little wine—which
 attracted him to the house. the fact was the poor fellow hung around there
 day after day for the chance of seeing laura for five minutes at a time.
 for her presence at dinner he would endure the long bore of the senator’s
 talk afterwards, while laura was off at some assembly, or excused herself
 on the plea of fatigue. now and then he accompanied her to some reception,
 and rarely, on off nights, he was blessed with her company in the parlor,
 when he sang, and was chatty and vivacious and performed a hundred little
 tricks of imitation and ventriloquism, and made himself as entertaining as
 a man could be.
 it puzzled him not a little that all his fascinations seemed to go for so
 little with laura; it was beyond his experience with women. sometimes
 laura was exceedingly kind and petted him a little, and took the trouble
 to exert her powers of pleasing, and to entangle him deeper and deeper.
 but this, it angered him afterwards to think, was in private; in public
 she was beyond his reach, and never gave occasion to the suspicion that
 she had any affair with him. he was never permitted to achieve the dignity
 of a serious flirtation with her in public.
 “why do you treat me so?” he once said, reproachfully.
 “treat you how?” asked laura in a sweet voice, lifting her eyebrows.
 “you know well enough. you let other fellows monopolize you in society,
 and you are as indifferent to me as if we were strangers.”
 “can i help it if they are attentive, can i be rude? but we are such old
 friends, mr. brierly, that i didn’t suppose you would be jealous.”
 “i think i must be a very old friend, then, by your conduct towards me. by
 the same rule i should judge that col. selby must be very new.”
 laura looked up quickly, as if about to return an indignant answer to such
 impertinence, but she only said, “well, what of col. selby, sauce-box?”
 “nothing, probably, you’ll care for. your being with him so much is the
 town talk, that’s all?”
 “what do people say?” asked laura calmly.
 “oh, they say a good many things. you are offended, though, to have me
 speak of it?”
 “not in the least. you are my true friend. i feel that i can trust you.
 you wouldn’t deceive me, harry?” throwing into her eyes a look of trust
 and tenderness that melted away all his petulance and distrust. “what do
 they say?”
 “some say that you’ve lost your head about him; others that you don’t care
 any more for him than you do for a dozen others, but that he is completely
 fascinated with you and about to desert his wife; and others say it is
 nonsense to suppose you would entangle yourself with a married man, and
 that your intimacy only arises from the matter of the cotton, claims, for
 which he wants your influence with dilworthy. but you know everybody is
 talked about more or less in washington. i shouldn’t care; but i wish you
 wouldn’t have so much to do with selby, laura,” continued harry, fancying
 that he was now upon such terms that his, advice, would be heeded.
 “and you believed these slanders?”
 “i don’t believe anything against you, laura, but col. selby does not mean
 you any good. i know you wouldn’t be seen with him if you knew his
 reputation.”
 “do you know him?” laura asked, as indifferently as she could.
 “only a little. i was at his lodgings’ in georgetown a day or two ago,
 with col. sellers. sellers wanted to talk with him about some patent
 remedy he has, eye water, or something of that sort, which he wants to
 introduce into europe. selby is going abroad very soon.”
 laura started; in spite of her self-control.
 “and his wife!—does he take his family? did you see his wife?”
 “yes. a dark little woman, rather worn—must have been pretty once
 though. has three or four children, one of them a baby. they’ll all go of
 course. she said she should be glad enough to get away from washington.
 you know selby has got his claim allowed, and they say he has had a run of
 luck lately at morrissey’s.”
 laura heard all this in a kind of stupor, looking straight at harry,
 without seeing him. is it possible, she was thinking, that this base
 wretch, after all his promises, will take his wife and children and leave
 me? is it possible the town is saying all these things about me? and a
 look of bitterness coming into her face—does the fool think he can
 escape so?
 “you are angry with me, laura,” said harry, not comprehending in the least
 what was going on in her mind.
 “angry?” she said, forcing herself to come back to his presence. “with
 you? oh no. i’m angry with the cruel world, which, pursues an independent
 woman as it never does a man. i’m grateful to you harry; i’m grateful to
 you for telling me of that odious man.”
 and she rose from her chair and gave him her pretty hand, which the silly
 fellow took, and kissed and clung to. and he said many silly things,
 before she disengaged herself gently, and left him, saying it was time to
 dress, for dinner.
 and harry went away, excited, and a little hopeful, but only a little. the
 happiness was only a gleam, which departed and left him thoroughly
 miserable. she never would love him, and she was going to the devil,
 besides. he couldn’t shut his eyes to what he saw, nor his ears to what he
 heard of her.
 what had come over this thrilling young lady-killer? it was a pity to see
 such a gay butterfly broken on a wheel. was there something good in him,
 after all, that had been touched? he was in fact madly in love with this
 woman.
 it is not for us to analyze the passion and say whether it was a worthy
 one. it absorbed his whole nature and made him wretched enough. if he
 deserved punishment, what more would you have? perhaps this love was
 kindling a new heroism in him.
 he saw the road on which laura was going clearly enough, though he did not
 believe the worst he heard of her. he loved her too passionately to credit
 that for a moment. and it seemed to him that if he could compel her to
 recognize her position, and his own devotion, she might love him, and that
 he could save her. his love was so far ennobled, and become a very
 different thing from its beginning in hawkeye. whether he ever thought
 that if he could save her from ruin, he could give her up himself, is
 doubtful. such a pitch of virtue does not occur often in real life,
 especially in such natures as harry’s, whose generosity and unselfishness
 were matters of temperament rather than habits or principles.
 he wrote a long letter to laura, an incoherent, passionate letter, pouring
 out his love as he could not do in her presence, and warning her as
 plainly as he dared of the dangers that surrounded her, and the risks she
 ran of compromising herself in many ways.
 laura read the letter, with a little sigh may be, as she thought of other
 days, but with contempt also, and she put it into the fire with the
 thought, “they are all alike.”
 harry was in the habit of writing to philip freely, and boasting also
 about his doings, as he could not help doing and remain himself. mixed up
 with his own exploits, and his daily triumphs as a lobbyist, especially in
 the matter of the new university, in which harry was to have something
 handsome, were amusing sketches of washington society, hints about
 dilworthy, stories about col. sellers, who had become a well-known
 character, and wise remarks upon the machinery of private legislation for
 the public-good, which greatly entertained philip in his convalescence.
 laura’s name occurred very often in these letters, at first in casual
 mention as the belle of the season, carrying everything before her with
 her wit and beauty, and then more seriously, as if harry did not exactly
 like so much general admiration of her, and was a little nettled by her
 treatment of him.
 this was so different from harry’s usual tone about women, that philip
 wondered a good deal over it. could it be possible that he was seriously
 affected? then came stories about laura, town talk, gossip which harry
 denied the truth of indignantly; but he was evidently uneasy, and at
 length wrote in such miserable spirits that philip asked him squarely what
 the trouble was; was he in love?
 upon this, harry made a clean breast of it, and told philip all he knew
 about the selby affair, and laura’s treatment of him, sometimes
 encouraging him—and then throwing him off, and finally his belief
 that she would go to the bad if something was not done to arouse her from
 her infatuation. he wished philip was in washington. he knew laura, and
 she had a great respect for his character, his opinions, his judgment.
 perhaps he, as an uninterested person in whom she would have some
 confidence, and as one of the public, could say some thing to her that
 would show her where she stood.
 philip saw the situation clearly enough. of laura he knew not much, except
 that she was a woman of uncommon fascination, and he thought from what he
 had seen of her in hawkeye, her conduct towards him and towards harry, of
 not too much principle. of course he knew nothing of her history; he knew
 nothing seriously against her, and if harry was desperately enamored of
 her, why should he not win her if he could. if, however, she had already
 become what harry uneasily felt she might become, was it not his duty to
 go to the rescue of his friend and try to save him from any rash act on
 account of a woman that might prove to be entirely unworthy of him; for
 trifler and visionary as he was, harry deserved a better fate than this.
 philip determined to go to washington and see for himself. he had other
 reasons also. he began to know enough of mr. bolton’s affairs to be
 uneasy. pennybacker had been there several times during the winter, and he
 suspected that he was involving mr. bolton in some doubtful scheme.
 pennybacker was in washington, and philip thought he might perhaps find
 out something about him, and his plans, that would be of service to mr.
 bolton.
 philip had enjoyed his winter very well, for a man with his arm broken and
 his head smashed. with two such nurses as ruth and alice, illness seemed
 to him rather a nice holiday, and every moment of his convalescence had
 been precious and all too fleeting. with a young fellow of the habits of
 philip, such injuries cannot be counted on to tarry long, even for the
 purpose of love-making, and philip found himself getting strong with even
 disagreeable rapidity.
 during his first weeks of pain and weakness, ruth was unceasing in her
 ministrations; she quietly took charge of him, and with a gentle firmness
 resisted all attempts of alice or any one else to share to any great
 extent the burden with her. she was clear, decisive and peremptory in
 whatever she did; but often when philip opened his eyes in those first
 days of suffering and found her standing by his bedside, he saw a look of
 tenderness in her anxious face that quickened his already feverish pulse,
 a look that remained in his heart long after he closed his eyes. sometimes
 he felt her hand on his forehead, and did not open his eyes for fear she
 would take it away. he watched for her coming to his chamber; he could
 distinguish her light footstep from all others. if this is what is meant
 by women practicing medicine, thought philip to himself, i like it.
 “ruth,” said he one day when he was getting to be quite himself, “i
 believe in it?”
 “believe in what?”
 “why, in women physicians.”
 “then, i’d better call in mrs. dr. longstreet.”
 “oh, no. one will do, one at a time. i think i should be well tomorrow, if
 i thought i should never have any other.”
 “thy physician thinks thee mustn’t talk, philip,” said ruth putting her
 finger on his lips.
 “but, ruth, i want to tell you that i should wish i never had got well if—”
 “there, there, thee must not talk. thee is wandering again,” and ruth
 closed his lips, with a smile on her own that broadened into a merry laugh
 as she ran away.
 philip was not weary, however, of making these attempts, he rather enjoyed
 it. but whenever he inclined to be sentimental, ruth would cut him off,
 with some such gravely conceived speech as, “does thee think that thy
 physician will take advantage of the condition of a man who is as weak as
 thee is? i will call alice, if thee has any dying confessions to make.”
 as philip convalesced, alice more and more took ruth’s place as his
 entertainer, and read to him by the hour, when he did not want to talk—to
 talk about ruth, as he did a good deal of the time. nor was this
 altogether unsatisfactory to philip. he was always happy and contented
 with alice. she was the most restful person he knew. better informed than
 ruth and with a much more varied culture, and bright and sympathetic, he
 was never weary of her company, if he was not greatly excited by it. she
 had upon his mind that peaceful influence that mrs. bolton had when,
 occasionally, she sat by his bedside with her work. some people have this
 influence, which is like an emanation. they bring peace to a house, they
 diffuse serene content in a room full of mixed company, though they may
 say very little, and are apparently unconscious of their own power.
 not that philip did not long for ruth’s presence all the same. since he
 was well enough to be about the house, she was busy again with her
 studies. now and then her teasing humor came again. she always had a
 playful shield against his sentiment. philip used sometimes to declare
 that she had no sentiment; and then he doubted if he should be pleased
 with her after all if she were at all sentimental; and he rejoiced that
 she had, in such matters what he called the airy grace of sanity. she was
 the most gay serious person he ever saw.
 perhaps he was not so much at rest or so contented with her as with alice.
 but then he loved her. and what have rest and contentment to do with love?
 mr. buckstone’s campaign was brief—much briefer than he supposed it
 would be. he began it purposing to win laura without being won himself;
 but his experience was that of all who had fought on that field before
 him; he diligently continued his effort to win her, but he presently found
 that while as yet he could not feel entirely certain of having won her, it
 was very manifest that she had won him. he had made an able fight, brief
 as it was, and that at least was to his credit. he was in good company,
 now; he walked in a leash of conspicuous captives. these unfortunates
 followed laura helplessly, for whenever she took a prisoner he remained
 her slave henceforth. sometimes they chafed in their bondage; sometimes
 they tore themselves free and said their serfdom was ended; but sooner or
 later they always came back penitent and worshiping. laura pursued her
 usual course: she encouraged mr. buckstone by turns, and by turns she
 harassed him; she exalted him to the clouds at one time, and at another
 she dragged him down again. she constituted him chief champion of the
 knobs university bill, and he accepted the position, at first reluctantly,
 but later as a valued means of serving her—he even came to look upon
 it as a piece of great good fortune, since it brought him into such
 frequent contact with her.
 through him she learned that the hon. mr. trollop was a bitter enemy of
 her bill. he urged her not to attempt to influence mr. trollop in any way,
 and explained that whatever she might attempt in that direction would
 surely be used against her and with damaging effect.
 she at first said she knew mr. trollop, “and was aware that he had a
 blank-blank;”—[**her private figure of speech for brother—or
 son-in-law]—but mr. buckstone said that he was not able to conceive
 what so curious a phrase as blank-blank might mean, and had no wish to pry
 into the matter, since it was probably private, he “would nevertheless
 venture the blind assertion that nothing would answer in this particular
 case and during this particular session but to be exceedingly wary and
 keep clear away from mr. trollop; any other course would be fatal.”
 it seemed that nothing could be done. laura was seriously troubled.
 everything was looking well, and yet it was plain that one vigorous and
 determined enemy might eventually succeed in overthrowing all her plans. a
 suggestion came into her mind presently and she said:
 “can’t you fight against his great pension bill and bring him to terms?”
 “oh, never; he and i are sworn brothers on that measure; we work in
 harness and are very loving—i do everything i possibly can for him
 there. but i work with might and main against his immigration bill,—as
 pertinaciously and as vindictively, indeed, as he works against our
 university. we hate each other through half a conversation and are all
 affection through the other half. we understand each other. he is an
 admirable worker outside the capitol; he will do more for the pension bill
 than any other man could do; i wish he would make the great speech on it
 which he wants to make—and then i would make another and we would be
 safe.”
 “well if he wants to make a great speech why doesn’t he do it?”
 visitors interrupted the conversation and mr. buckstone took his leave. it
 was not of the least moment to laura that her question had not been
 answered, inasmuch as it concerned a thing which did not interest her; and
 yet, human being like, she thought she would have liked to know. an
 opportunity occurring presently, she put the same question to another
 person and got an answer that satisfied her. she pondered a good while
 that night, after she had gone to bed, and when she finally turned over to
 go to sleep, she had thought out a new scheme. the next evening at mrs.
 gloverson’s party, she said to mr. buckstone:
 “i want mr. trollop to make his great speech on the pension bill.”
 “do you? but you remember i was interrupted, and did not explain to you—”
 “never mind, i know. you must make him make that speech. i very
 particularly desire it.”
 “oh, it is easy to say make him do it, but how am i to make him!”
 “it is perfectly easy; i have thought it all out.”
 she then went into the details. at length mr. buckstone said:
 “i see now. i can manage it, i am sure. indeed i wonder he never thought
 of it himself—there are no end of precedents. but how is this going
 to benefit you, after i have managed it? there is where the mystery lies.”
 “but i will take care of that. it will benefit me a great deal.”
 “i only wish i could see how; it is the oddest freak. you seem to go the
 furthest around to get at a thing—but you are in earnest, aren’t
 you?”
 “yes i am, indeed.”
 “very well, i will do it—but why not tell me how you imagine it is
 going to help you?”
 “i will, by and by.—now there is nobody talking to him. go straight
 and do it, there’s a good fellow.”
 a moment or two later the two sworn friends of the pension bill were
 talking together, earnestly, and seemingly unconscious of the moving
 throng about them. they talked an hour, and then mr. buckstone came back
 and said:
 “he hardly fancied it at first, but he fell in love with it after a bit.
 and we have made a compact, too. i am to keep his secret and he is to
 spare me, in future, when he gets ready to denounce the supporters of the
 university bill—and i can easily believe he will keep his word on
 this occasion.”
 a fortnight elapsed, and the university bill had gathered to itself many
 friends, meantime. senator dilworthy began to think the harvest was ripe.
 he conferred with laura privately. she was able to tell him exactly how
 the house would vote. there was a majority—the bill would pass,
 unless weak members got frightened at the last, and deserted—a thing
 pretty likely to occur. the senator said:
 “i wish we had one more good strong man. now trollop ought to be on our
 side, for he is a friend of the negro. but he is against us, and is our
 bitterest opponent. if he would simply vote no, but keep quiet and not
 molest us, i would feel perfectly cheerful and content. but perhaps there
 is no use in thinking of that.”
 “why i laid a little plan for his benefit two weeks ago. i think he will
 be tractable, maybe. he is to come here tonight.”
 “look out for him, my child! he means mischief, sure. it is said that he
 claims to know of improper practices having been used in the interest of
 this bill, and he thinks he sees a chance to make a great sensation when
 the bill comes up. be wary. be very, very careful, my dear. do your very
 ablest talking, now. you can convince a man of anything, when you try. you
 must convince him that if anything improper has been done, you at least
 are ignorant of it and sorry for it. and if you could only persuade him
 out of his hostility to the bill, too—but don’t overdo the thing;
 don’t seem too anxious, dear.”
 “i won’t; i’ll be ever so careful. i’ll talk as sweetly to him as if he
 were my own child! you may trust me—indeed you may.”
 the door-bell rang.
 “that is the gentleman now,” said laura. senator dilworthy retired to his
 study.
 laura welcomed mr. trollop, a grave, carefully dressed and very
 respectable looking man, with a bald head, standing collar and old
 fashioned watch seals.
 “promptness is a virtue, mr. trollop, and i perceive that you have it. you
 are always prompt with me.”
 “i always meet my engagements, of every kind, miss hawkins.”
 “it is a quality which is rarer in the world than it has been, i believe.
 i wished to see you on business, mr. trollop.”
 “i judged so. what can i do for you?”
 “you know my bill—the knobs university bill?”
 “ah, i believe it is your bill. i had forgotten. yes, i know the bill.”
 “well, would you mind telling me your opinion of it?”
 “indeed, since you seem to ask it without reserve, i am obliged to say
 that i do not regard it favorably. i have not seen the bill itself, but
 from what i can hear, it—it—well, it has a bad look about it.
 it—”
 “speak it out—never fear.”
 “well, it—they say it contemplates a fraud upon the government.”
 “well?” said laura tranquilly.
 “well! i say ‘well?’ too.”
 “well, suppose it were a fraud—which i feel able to deny—would
 it be the first one?”
 “you take a body’s breath away! would you—did you wish me to vote
 for it? was that what you wanted to see me about?”
 “your instinct is correct. i did want you—i do want you to vote for
 it.”
 “vote for a fr—for a measure which is generally believed to be at
 least questionable? i am afraid we cannot come to an understanding, miss
 hawkins.”
 “no, i am afraid not—if you have resumed your principles, mr.
 trollop.”
 “did you send for me merely to insult me? it is time for me to take my
 leave, miss hawkins.”
 “no—wait a moment. don’t be offended at a trifle. do not be offish
 and unsociable. the steamship subsidy bill was a fraud on the government.
 you voted for it, mr. trollop, though you always opposed the measure until
 after you had an interview one evening with a certain mrs. mccarter at her
 house. she was my agent. she was acting for me. ah, that is right—sit
 down again. you can be sociable, easily enough if you have a mind to.
 well? i am waiting. have you nothing to say?”
 “miss hawkins, i voted for that bill because when i came to examine into
 it—”
 “ah yes. when you came to examine into it. well, i only want you to
 examine into my bill. mr. trollop, you would not sell your vote on that
 subsidy bill—which was perfectly right—but you accepted of
 some of the stock, with the understanding that it was to stand in your
 brother-in-law’s name.”
 “there is no pr—i mean, this is, utterly groundless, miss hawkins.”
 but the gentleman seemed somewhat uneasy, nevertheless.
 “well, not entirely so, perhaps. i and a person whom we will call miss
 blank (never mind the real name,) were in a closet at your elbow all the
 while.”
 mr. trollop winced—then he said with dignity:
 “miss hawkins is it possible that you were capable of such a thing as
 that?”
 “it was bad; i confess that. it was bad. almost as bad as selling one’s
 vote for—but i forget; you did not sell your vote—you only
 accepted a little trifle, a small token of esteem, for your
 brother-in-law. oh, let us come out and be frank with each other: i know
 you, mr. trollop. i have met you on business three or four times; true, i
 never offered to corrupt your principles—never hinted such a thing;
 but always when i had finished sounding you, i manipulated you through an
 agent. let us be frank. wear this comely disguise of virtue before the
 public—it will count there; but here it is out of place. my dear
 sir, by and by there is going to be an investigation into that national
 internal improvement directors’ relief measure of a few years ago, and you
 know very well that you will be a crippled man, as likely as not, when it
 is completed.”
 “it cannot be shown that a man is a knave merely for owning that stock. i
 am not distressed about the national improvement relief measure.”
 “oh indeed i am not trying to distress you. i only wished to make good my
 assertion that i knew you. several of you gentlemen bought of that stack
 (without paying a penny down) received dividends from it, (think of the
 happy idea of receiving dividends, and very large ones, too, from stock
 one hasn’t paid for!) and all the while your names never appeared in the
 transaction; if ever you took the stock at all, you took it in other
 people’s names. now you see, you had to know one of two things; namely,
 you either knew that the idea of all this preposterous generosity was to
 bribe you into future legislative friendship, or you didn’t know it. that
 is to say, you had to be either a knave or a—well, a fool—there
 was no middle ground. you are not a fool, mr. trollop.”
 “miss hawking you flatter me. but seriously, you do not forget that some
 of the best and purest men in congress took that stock in that way?”
 “did senator blank?”
 “well, no—i believe not.”
 “of course you believe not. do you suppose he was ever approached, on the
 subject?”
 “perhaps not.”
 “if you had approached him, for instance, fortified with the fact that
 some of the best men in congress, and the purest, etc., etc.; what would
 have been the result?”
 “well, what would have been the result?”
 “he would have shown you the door! for mr. blank is neither a knave nor a
 fool. there are other men in the senate and the house whom no one would
 have been hardy enough to approach with that relief stock in that
 peculiarly generous way, but they are not of the class that you regard as
 the best and purest. no, i say i know you mr. trollop. that is to say, one
 may suggest a thing to mr. trollop which it would not do to suggest to mr.
 blank. mr. trollop, you are pledged to support the indigent congressmen’s
 retroactive appropriation which is to come up, either in this or the next
 session. you do not deny that, even in public. the man that will vote for
 that bill will break the eighth commandment in any other way, sir!”
 “but he will not vote for your corrupt measure, nevertheless, madam!”
 exclaimed mr. trollop, rising from his seat in a passion.
 “ah, but he will. sit down again, and let me explain why. oh, come, don’t
 behave so. it is very unpleasant. now be good, and you shall have the
 missing page of your great speech. here it is!”—and she displayed a
 sheet of manuscript.
 mr. trollop turned immediately back from the threshold. it might have been
 gladness that flashed into his face; it might have been something else;
 but at any rate there was much astonishment mixed with it.
 “good! where did you get it? give it me!”
 “now there is no hurry. sit down; sit down and let us talk and be
 friendly.”
 the gentleman wavered. then he said:
 “no, this is only a subterfuge. i will go. it is not the missing page.”
 laura tore off a couple of lines from the bottom of the sheet.
 “now,” she said, “you will know whether this is the handwriting or not.
 you know it is the handwriting. now if you will listen, you will know that
 this must be the list of statistics which was to be the ‘nub’ of your
 great effort, and the accompanying blast the beginning of the burst of
 eloquence which was continued on the next page—and you will
 recognize that there was where you broke down.”
 she read the page. mr. trollop said:
 “this is perfectly astounding. still, what is all this to me? it is
 nothing. it does not concern me. the speech is made, and there an end. i
 did break down for a moment, and in a rather uncomfortable place, since i
 had led up to those statistics with some grandeur; the hiatus was
 pleasanter to the house and the galleries than it was to me. but it is no
 matter now. a week has passed; the jests about it ceased three or four
 days ago. the whole thing is a matter of indifference to me, miss
 hawkins.”
 “but you apologized; and promised the statistics for next day. why didn’t
 you keep your promise.”
 “the matter was not of sufficient consequence. the time was gone by to
 produce an effect with them.”
 “but i hear that other friends of the soldiers’ pension bill desire them
 very much. i think you ought to let them have them.”
 “miss hawkins, this silly blunder of my copyist evidently has more
 interest for you than it has for me. i will send my private secretary to
 you and let him discuss the subject with you at length.”
 “did he copy your speech for you?”
 “of course he did. why all these questions? tell me—how did you get
 hold of that page of manuscript? that is the only thing that stirs a
 passing interest in my mind.”
 “i’m coming to that.” then she said, much as if she were talking to
 herself: “it does seem like taking a deal of unnecessary pains, for a body
 to hire another body to construct a great speech for him and then go and
 get still another body to copy it before it can be read in the house.”
 “miss hawkins, what do you mean by such talk as that?”
 “why i am sure i mean no harm—no harm to anybody in the world. i am
 certain that i overheard the hon. mr. buckstone either promise to write
 your great speech for you or else get some other competent person to do
 it.”
 “this is perfectly absurd, madam, perfectly absurd!” and mr. trollop
 affected a laugh of derision.
 “why, the thing has occurred before now. i mean that i have heard that
 congressmen have sometimes hired literary grubs to build speeches for
 them.—now didn’t i overhear a conversation like that i spoke of?”
 “pshaw! why of course you may have overheard some such jesting nonsense.
 but would one be in earnest about so farcical a thing?”
 “well if it was only a joke, why did you make a serious matter of it? why
 did you get the speech written for you, and then read it in the house
 without ever having it copied?”
 mr. trollop did not laugh this time; he seemed seriously perplexed. he
 said:
 “come, play out your jest, miss hawkins. i can’t understand what you are
 contriving—but it seems to entertain you—so please, go on.”
 “i will, i assure you; but i hope to make the matter entertaining to you,
 too. your private secretary never copied your speech.”
 “indeed? really you seem to know my affairs better than i do myself.”
 “i believe i do. you can’t name your own amanuensis, mr. trollop.”
 “that is sad, indeed. perhaps miss hawkins can?”
 “yes, i can. i wrote your speech myself, and you read it from my
 manuscript. there, now!”
 mr. trollop did not spring to his feet and smite his brow with his hand
 while a cold sweat broke out all over him and the color forsook his face—no,
 he only said, “good god!” and looked greatly astonished.
 laura handed him her commonplace-book and called his attention to the fact
 that the handwriting there and the handwriting of this speech were the
 same. he was shortly convinced. he laid the book aside and said,
 composedly:
 “well, the wonderful tragedy is done, and it transpires that i am indebted
 to you for my late eloquence. what of it? what was all this for and what
 does it amount to after all? what do you propose to do about it?”
 “oh nothing. it is only a bit of pleasantry. when i overheard that
 conversation i took an early opportunity to ask mr. buckstone if he knew
 of anybody who might want a speech written—i had a friend, and so
 forth and so on. i was the friend, myself; i thought i might do you a good
 turn then and depend on you to do me one by and by. i never let mr.
 buckstone have the speech till the last moment, and when you hurried off
 to the house with it, you did not know there was a missing page, of
 course, but i did.”
 “and now perhaps you think that if i refuse to support your bill, you will
 make a grand exposure?”
 “well i had not thought of that. i only kept back the page for the mere
 fun of the thing; but since you mention it, i don’t know but i might do
 something if i were angry.”
 “my dear miss hawkins, if you were to give out that you composed my
 speech, you know very well that people would say it was only your
 raillery, your fondness for putting a victim in the pillory and amusing
 the public at his expense. it is too flimsy, miss hawkins, for a person of
 your fine inventive talent—contrive an abler device than that.
 come!”
 “it is easily done, mr. trollop. i will hire a man, and pin this page on
 his breast, and label it, ‘the missing fragment of the hon. mr. trollop’s
 great speech—which speech was written and composed by miss laura
 hawkins under a secret understanding for one hundred dollars—and the
 money has not been paid.’ and i will pin round about it notes in my
 handwriting, which i will procure from prominent friends of mine for the
 occasion; also your printed speech in the globe, showing the connection
 between its bracketed hiatus and my fragment; and i give you my word of
 honor that i will stand that human bulletin board in the rotunda of the
 capitol and make him stay there a week! you see you are premature, mr.
 trollop, the wonderful tragedy is not done yet, by any means. come, now,
 doesn’t it improve?”
 mr trollop opened his eyes rather widely at this novel aspect of the case.
 he got up and walked the floor and gave himself a moment for reflection.
 then he stopped and studied laura’s face a while, and ended by saying:
 “well, i am obliged to believe you would be reckless enough to do that.”
 “then don’t put me to the test, mr. trollop. but let’s drop the matter. i
 have had my joke and you’ve borne the infliction becomingly enough. it
 spoils a jest to harp on it after one has had one’s laugh. i would much
 rather talk about my bill.”
 “so would i, now, my clandestine amanuensis. compared with some other
 subjects, even your bill is a pleasant topic to discuss.”
 “very good indeed! i thought i could persuade you. now i am sure you will
 be generous to the poor negro and vote for that bill.”
 “yes, i feel more tenderly toward the oppressed colored man than i did.
 shall we bury the hatchet and be good friends and respect each other’s
 little secrets, on condition that i vote aye on the measure?”
 “with all my heart, mr. trollop. i give you my word of that.”
 “it is a bargain. but isn’t there something else you could give me, too?”
 laura looked at him inquiringly a moment, and then she comprehended.
 “oh, yes! you may have it now. i haven’t any more use for it.” she picked
 up the page of manuscript, but she reconsidered her intention of handing
 it to him, and said, “but never mind; i will keep it close; no one shall
 see it; you shall have it as soon as your vote is recorded.”
 mr. trollop looked disappointed. but presently made his adieux, and had
 got as far as the hall, when something occurred to laura. she said to
 herself, “i don’t simply want his vote under compulsion—he might
 vote aye, but work against the bill in secret, for revenge; that man is
 unscrupulous enough to do anything. i must have his hearty co-operation as
 well as his vote. there is only one way to get that.”
 she called him back, and said:
 “i value your vote, mr. trollop, but i value your influence more. you are
 able to help a measure along in many ways, if you choose. i want to ask
 you to work for the bill as well as vote for it.”
 “it takes so much of one’s time, miss hawkins—and time is money, you
 know.”
 “yes, i know it is—especially in congress. now there is no use in
 you and i dealing in pretenses and going at matters in round-about ways.
 we know each other—disguises are nonsense. let us be plain. i will
 make it an object to you to work for the bill.”
 “don’t make it unnecessarily plain, please. there are little proprieties
 that are best preserved. what do you propose?”
 “well, this.” she mentioned the names of several prominent congressmen.
 “now,” said she, “these gentlemen are to vote and work for the bill,
 simply out of love for the negro—and out of pure generosity i have
 put in a relative of each as a member of the university incorporation.
 they will handle a million or so of money, officially, but will receive no
 salaries. a larger number of statesmen are to vote and work for the bill—also
 out of love for the negro—gentlemen of but moderate influence, these—and
 out of pure generosity i am to see that relatives of theirs have positions
 in the university, with salaries, and good ones, too. you will vote and
 work for the bill, from mere affection for the negro, and i desire to
 testify my gratitude becomingly. make free choice. have you any friend
 whom you would like to present with a salaried or unsalaried position in
 our institution?”
 “well, i have a brother-in-law—”
 “that same old brother-in-law, you good unselfish provider! i have heard
 of him often, through my agents. how regularly he does ‘turn up,’ to be
 sure. he could deal with those millions virtuously, and withal with
 ability, too—but of course you would rather he had a salaried
 position?”
 “oh, no,” said the gentleman, facetiously, “we are very humble, very
 humble in our desires; we want no money; we labor solely, for our country
 and require no reward but the luxury of an applauding conscience. make him
 one of those poor hard working unsalaried corporators and let him do every
 body good with those millions—and go hungry himself! i will try to
 exert a little influence in favor of the bill.”
 arrived at home, mr. trollop sat down and thought it all over—something
 after this fashion: it is about the shape it might have taken if he had
 spoken it aloud.
 “my reputation is getting a little damaged, and i meant to clear it up
 brilliantly with an exposure of this bill at the supreme moment, and ride
 back into congress on the eclat of it; and if i had that bit of
 manuscript, i would do it yet. it would be more money in my pocket in the
 end, than my brother-in-law will get out of that incorporatorship, fat as
 it is. but that sheet of paper is out of my reach—she will never let
 that get out of her hands. and what a mountain it is! it blocks up my
 road, completely. she was going to hand it to me, once. why didn’t she!
 must be a deep woman. deep devil! that is what she is; a beautiful devil—and
 perfectly fearless, too. the idea of her pinning that paper on a man and
 standing him up in the rotunda looks absurd at a first glance. but she
 would do it! she is capable of doing anything. i went there hoping she
 would try to bribe me—good solid capital that would be in the
 exposure. well, my prayer was answered; she did try to bribe me; and i
 made the best of a bad bargain and let her. i am checkmated. i must
 contrive something fresh to get back to congress on. very well; a bird in
 the hand is worth two in the bush; i will work for the bill—the
 incorporatorship will be a very good thing.”
 as soon as mr. trollop had taken his leave, laura ran to senator dilworthy
 and began to speak, but he interrupted her and said distressfully, without
 even turning from his writing to look at her:
 “only half an hour! you gave it up early, child. however, it was best, it
 was best—i’m sure it was best—and safest.”
 “give it up! i!”
 the senator sprang up, all aglow:
 “my child, you can’t mean that you—”
 “i’ve made him promise on honor to think about a compromise tonight and
 come and tell me his decision in the morning.”
 “good! there’s hope yet that—”
 “nonsense, uncle. i’ve made him engage to let the tennessee land bill
 utterly alone!”
 “impossible! you—”
 “i’ve made him promise to vote with us!”
 “incredible! abso—”
 “i’ve made him swear that he’ll work for us!”
 “pre - - - posterous!—utterly pre—break a window, child,
 before i suffocate!”
 “no matter, it’s true anyway. now we can march into congress with drums
 beating and colors flying!”
 “well—well—well. i’m sadly bewildered, sadly bewildered. i
 can’t understand it at all—the most extraordinary woman that ever—it’s
 a great day, it’s a great day. there—there—let me put my hand
 in benediction on this precious head. ah, my child, the poor negro will
 bless—”
 “oh bother the poor negro, uncle! put it in your speech. good-night,
 good-bye—we’ll marshal our forces and march with the dawn!”
 laura reflected a while, when she was alone, and then fell to laughing,
 peacefully.
 “everybody works for me,”—so ran her thought. “it was a good idea to
 make buckstone lead mr. trollop on to get a great speech written for him;
 and it was a happy part of the same idea for me to copy the speech after
 mr. buckstone had written it, and then keep back a page. mr. b. was very
 complimentary to me when trollop’s break-down in the house showed him the
 object of my mysterious scheme; i think he will say still finer things
 when i tell him the triumph the sequel to it has gained for us.
 “but what a coward the man was, to believe i would have exposed that page
 in the rotunda, and so exposed myself. however, i don’t know—i don’t
 know. i will think a moment. suppose he voted no; suppose the bill failed;
 that is to suppose this stupendous game lost forever, that i have played
 so desperately for; suppose people came around pitying me—odious!
 and he could have saved me by his single voice. yes, i would have exposed
 him! what would i care for the talk that that would have made about me
 when i was gone to europe with selby and all the world was busy with my
 history and my dishonor? it would be almost happiness to spite somebody at
 such a time.”
 the very next day, sure enough, the campaign opened. in due course, the
 speaker of the house reached that order of business which is termed
 “notices of bills,” and then the hon. mr. buckstone rose in his place and
 gave notice of a bill “to found and incorporate the knobs industrial
 university,” and then sat down without saying anything further. the busy
 gentlemen in the reporters’ gallery jotted a line in their note-books, ran
 to the telegraphic desk in a room which communicated with their own
 writing-parlor, and then hurried back to their places in the gallery; and
 by the time they had resumed their seats, the line which they had
 delivered to the operator had been read in telegraphic offices in towns
 and cities hundreds of miles away. it was distinguished by frankness of
 language as well as by brevity:
 “the child is born. buckstone gives notice of the thieving knobs
 university job. it is said the noses have been counted and enough votes
 have been bought to pass it.”
 for some time the correspondents had been posting their several journals
 upon the alleged disreputable nature of the bill, and furnishing daily
 reports of the washington gossip concerning it. so the next morning,
 nearly every newspaper of character in the land assailed the measure and
 hurled broadsides of invective at mr. buckstone. the washington papers
 were more respectful, as usual—and conciliatory, also, as usual.
 they generally supported measures, when it was possible; but when they
 could not they “deprecated” violent expressions of opinion in other
 journalistic quarters.
 they always deprecated, when there was trouble ahead. however, ‘the
 washington daily love-feast’ hailed the bill with warm approbation. this
 was senator balaam’s paper—or rather, “brother” balaam, as he was
 popularly called, for he had been a clergyman, in his day; and he himself
 and all that he did still emitted an odor of sanctity now that he had
 diverged into journalism and politics. he was a power in the congressional
 prayer meeting, and in all movements that looked to the spread of religion
 and temperance.
 his paper supported the new bill with gushing affection; it was a noble
 measure; it was a just measure; it was a generous measure; it was a pure
 measure, and that surely should recommend it in these corrupt times; and
 finally, if the nature of the bill were not known at all, the ‘love feast’
 would support it anyway, and unhesitatingly, for the fact that senator
 dilworthy was the originator of the measure was a guaranty that it
 contemplated a worthy and righteous work.
 senator dilworthy was so anxious to know what the new york papers would
 say about the bill, that he had arranged to have synopses of their
 editorials telegraphed to him; he could not wait for the papers themselves
 to crawl along down to washington by a mail train which has never run over
 a cow since the road was built; for the reason that it has never been able
 to overtake one. it carries the usual “cow-catcher” in front of the
 locomotive, but this is mere ostentation. it ought to be attached to the
 rear car, where it could do some good; but instead, no provision is made
 there for the protection of the traveling public, and hence it is not a
 matter of surprise that cows so frequently climb aboard that train and
 among the passengers.
 the senator read his dispatches aloud at the breakfast table. laura was
 troubled beyond measure at their tone, and said that that sort of comment
 would defeat the bill; but the senator said:
 “oh, not at all, not at all, my child. it is just what we want.
 persecution is the one thing needful, now—all the other forces are
 secured. give us newspaper persecution enough, and we are safe. vigorous
 persecution will alone carry a bill sometimes, dear; and when you start
 with a strong vote in the first place, persecution comes in with double
 effect. it scares off some of the weak supporters, true, but it soon turns
 strong ones into stubborn ones. and then, presently, it changes the tide
 of public opinion. the great public is weak-minded; the great public is
 sentimental; the great public always turns around and weeps for an odious
 murderer, and prays for him, and carries flowers to his prison and
 besieges the governor with appeals to his clemency, as soon as the papers
 begin to howl for that man’s blood.—in a word, the great
 putty-hearted public loves to ‘gush,’ and there is no such darling
 opportunity to gush as a case of persecution affords.”
 “well, uncle, dear; if your theory is right, let us go into raptures, for
 nobody can ask a heartier persecution than these editorials are
 furnishing.”
 “i am not so sure of that, my daughter. i don’t entirely like the tone of
 some of these remarks. they lack vim, they lack venom. here is one calls
 it a ‘questionable measure.’ bah, there is no strength in that. this one
 is better; it calls it ‘highway robbery.’ that sounds something like. but
 now this one seems satisfied to call it an ‘iniquitous scheme’.
 ‘iniquitous’ does not exasperate anybody; it is weak—puerile. the
 ignorant will imagine it to be intended for a compliment. but this other
 one—the one i read last—has the true ring: ‘this vile, dirty
 effort to rob the public treasury, by the kites and vultures that now
 infest the filthy den called congress’—that is admirable, admirable!
 we must have more of that sort. but it will come—no fear of that;
 they’re not warmed up, yet. a week from now you’ll see.”
 “uncle, you and brother balaam are bosom friends—why don’t you get
 his paper to persecute us, too?”
 “it isn’t worth while, my daughter. his support doesn’t hurt a bill.
 nobody reads his editorials but himself. but i wish the new york papers
 would talk a little plainer. it is annoying to have to wait a week for
 them to warm up. i expected better things at their hands—and time is
 precious, now.”
 at the proper hour, according to his previous notice, mr. buckstone duly
 introduced his bill entitled “an act to found and incorporate the knobs
 industrial university,” moved its proper reference, and sat down.
 the speaker of the house rattled off this observation:
 “‘fnobjectionbilltakuzhlcoixrssoreferred!’”
 habitues of the house comprehended that this long, lightning-heeled word
 signified that if there was no objection, the bill would take the
 customary course of a measure of its nature, and be referred to the
 committee on benevolent appropriations, and that it was accordingly so
 referred. strangers merely supposed that the speaker was taking a gargle
 for some affection of the throat.
 the reporters immediately telegraphed the introduction of the bill.—and
 they added:
 “the assertion that the bill will pass was premature. it is said that
 many favorers of it will desert when the storm breaks upon them from the
 public press.”
 the storm came, and during ten days it waxed more and more violent day by
 day. the great “negro university swindle” became the one absorbing topic
 of conversation throughout the union. individuals denounced it, journals
 denounced it, public meetings denounced it, the pictorial papers
 caricatured its friends, the whole nation seemed to be growing frantic
 over it. meantime the washington correspondents were sending such
 telegrams as these abroad in the land; under date of—
 saturday. “congressmen jex and fluke are wavering; it is believed they
 will desert the execrable bill.” monday. “jex and fluke have deserted!”
 thursday. “tubbs and huffy left the sinking ship last night”
 later on:
 “three desertions. the university thieves are getting scared, though
 they will not own it.”
 later:
 “the leaders are growing stubborn—they swear they can carry it,
 but it is now almost certain that they no longer have a majority!”
 after a day or two of reluctant and ambiguous telegrams:
 “public sentiment seems changing, a trifle in favor of the bill—but
 only a trifle.”
 and still later:
 “it is whispered that the hon. mr. trollop has gone over to the pirates.
 it is probably a canard. mr. trollop has all along been the bravest and
 most efficient champion of virtue and the people against the bill, and
 the report is without doubt a shameless invention.”
 next day:
 “with characteristic treachery, the truckling and pusillanimous reptile,
 crippled-speech trollop, has gone over to the enemy. it is contended,
 now, that he has been a friend to the bill, in secret, since the day it
 was introduced, and has had bankable reasons for being so; but he
 himself declares that he has gone over because the malignant persecution
 of the bill by the newspapers caused him to study its provisions with
 more care than he had previously done, and this close examination
 revealed the fact that the measure is one in every way worthy of
 support. (pretty thin!) it cannot be denied that this desertion has had
 a damaging effect. jex and fluke have returned to their iniquitous
 allegiance, with six or eight others of lesser calibre, and it is
 reported and believed that tubbs and huffy are ready to go back. it is
 feared that the university swindle is stronger to-day than it has ever
 been before.”
 later-midnight:
 “it is said that the committee will report the bill back to-morrow. both
 sides are marshaling their forces, and the fight on this bill is
 evidently going to be the hottest of the session.—all washington
 is boiling.”
 “it’s easy enough for another fellow to talk,” said harry, despondingly,
 after he had put philip in possession of his view of the case. “it’s easy
 enough to say ‘give her up,’ if you don’t care for her. what am i going to
 do to give her up?”
 it seemed to harry that it was a situation requiring some active measures.
 he couldn’t realize that he had fallen hopelessly in love without some
 rights accruing to him for the possession of the object of his passion.
 quiet resignation under relinquishment of any thing he wanted was not in
 his line. and when it appeared to him that his surrender of laura would be
 the withdrawal of the one barrier that kept her from ruin, it was
 unreasonable to expect that he could see how to give her up.
 harry had the most buoyant confidence in his own projects always; he saw
 everything connected with himself in a large way and in rosy lines. this
 predominance of the imagination over the judgment gave that appearance of
 exaggeration to his conversation and to his communications with regard to
 himself, which sometimes conveyed the impression that he was not speaking
 the truth. his acquaintances had been known to say that they invariably
 allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements, and held the other half
 under advisement for confirmation.
 philip in this case could not tell from harry’s story exactly how much
 encouragement laura had given him, nor what hopes he might justly have of
 winning her. he had never seen him desponding before. the “brag” appeared
 to be all taken out of him, and his airy manner only asserted itself now
 and then in a comical imitation of its old self.
 philip wanted time to look about him before he decided what to do. he was
 not familiar with washington, and it was difficult to adjust his feelings
 and perceptions to its peculiarities. coming out of the sweet sanity of
 the bolton household, this was by contrast the maddest vanity fair one
 could conceive. it seemed to him a feverish, unhealthy atmosphere in which
 lunacy would be easily developed. he fancied that everybody attached to
 himself an exaggerated importance, from the fact of being at the national
 capital, the center of political influence, the fountain of patronage,
 preferment, jobs and opportunities.
 people were introduced to each other as from this or that state, not from
 cities or towns, and this gave a largeness to their representative
 feeling. all the women talked politics as naturally and glibly as they
 talk fashion or literature elsewhere. there was always some exciting topic
 at the capitol, or some huge slander was rising up like a miasmatic
 exhalation from the potomac, threatening to settle no one knew exactly
 where. every other person was an aspirant for a place, or, if he had one,
 for a better place, or more pay; almost every other one had some claim or
 interest or remedy to urge; even the women were all advocates for the
 advancement of some person, and they violently espoused or denounced this
 or that measure as it would affect some relative, acquaintance or friend.
 love, travel, even death itself, waited on the chances of the dies daily
 thrown in the two houses, and the committee rooms there. if the measure
 went through, love could afford to ripen into marriage, and longing for
 foreign travel would have fruition; and it must have been only eternal
 hope springing in the breast that kept alive numerous old claimants who
 for years and years had besieged the doors of congress, and who looked as
 if they needed not so much an appropriation of money as six feet of
 ground. and those who stood so long waiting for success to bring them
 death were usually those who had a just claim.
 representing states and talking of national and even international
 affairs, as familiarly as neighbors at home talk of poor crops and the
 extravagance of their ministers, was likely at first to impose upon philip
 as to the importance of the people gathered here.
 there was a little newspaper editor from phil’s native town, the assistant
 on a peddletonian weekly, who made his little annual joke about the “first
 egg laid on our table,” and who was the menial of every tradesman in the
 village and under bonds to him for frequent “puffs,” except the
 undertaker, about whose employment he was recklessly facetious. in
 washington he was an important man, correspondent, and clerk of two house
 committees, a “worker” in politics, and a confident critic of every woman
 and every man in washington. he would be a consul no doubt by and by, at
 some foreign port, of the language of which he was ignorant—though
 if ignorance of language were a qualification he might have been a consul
 at home. his easy familiarity with great men was beautiful to see, and
 when philip learned what a tremendous underground influence this little
 ignoramus had, he no longer wondered at the queer appointments and the
 queerer legislation.
 philip was not long in discovering that people in washington did not
 differ much from other people; they had the same meannesses, generosities,
 and tastes: a washington boarding house had the odor of a boarding house
 the world over.
 col. sellers was as unchanged as any one philip saw whom he had known
 elsewhere. washington appeared to be the native element of this man. his
 pretentions were equal to any he encountered there. he saw nothing in its
 society that equalled that of hawkeye, he sat down to no table that could
 not be unfavorably contrasted with his own at home; the most airy scheme
 inflated in the hot air of the capital only reached in magnitude some of
 his lesser fancies, the by-play of his constructive imagination.
 “the country is getting along very well,” he said to philip, “but our
 public men are too timid. what we want is more money. i’ve told boutwell
 so. talk about basing the currency on gold; you might as well base it on
 pork. gold is only one product. base it on everything! you’ve got to do
 something for the west. how am i to move my crops? we must have
 improvements. grant’s got the idea. we want a canal from the james river
 to the mississippi. government ought to build it.”
 it was difficult to get the colonel off from these large themes when he
 was once started, but philip brought the conversation round to laura and
 her reputation in the city.
 “no,” he said, “i haven’t noticed much. we’ve been so busy about this
 university. it will make laura rich with the rest of us, and she has done
 nearly as much as if she were a man. she has great talent, and will make a
 big match. i see the foreign ministers and that sort after her. yes, there
 is talk, always will be about a pretty woman so much in public as she is.
 tough stories come to me, but i put’em away. ’taint likely one of si
 hawkins’s children would do that—for she is the same as a child of
 his. i told her, though, to go slow,” added the colonel, as if that
 mysterious admonition from him would set everything right.
 “do you know anything about a col. selby?”
 “know all about him. fine fellow. but he’s got a wife; and i told him, as
 a friend, he’d better sheer off from laura. i reckon he thought better of
 it and did.”
 but philip was not long in learning the truth. courted as laura was by a
 certain class and still admitted into society, that, nevertheless, buzzed
 with disreputable stories about her, she had lost character with the best
 people. her intimacy with selby was open gossip, and there were winks and
 thrustings of the tongue in any group of men when she passed by. it was
 clear enough that harry’s delusion must be broken up, and that no such
 feeble obstacle as his passion could interpose would turn laura from her
 fate. philip determined to see her, and put himself in possession of the
 truth, as he suspected it, in order to show harry his folly.
 laura, after her last conversation with harry, had a new sense of her
 position. she had noticed before the signs of a change in manner towards
 her, a little less respect perhaps from men, and an avoidance by women.
 she had attributed this latter partly to jealousy of her, for no one is
 willing to acknowledge a fault in himself when a more agreeable motive can
 be found for the estrangement of his acquaintances. but now, if society
 had turned on her, she would defy it. it was not in her nature to shrink.
 she knew she had been wronged, and she knew that she had no remedy.
 what she heard of col. selby’s proposed departure alarmed her more than
 anything else, and she calmly determined that if he was deceiving her the
 second time it should be the last. let society finish the tragedy if it
 liked; she was indifferent what came after. at the first opportunity, she
 charged selby with his intention to abandon her. he unblushingly denied
 it.
 he had not thought of going to europe. he had only been amusing himself
 with sellers’ schemes. he swore that as soon as she succeeded with her
 bill, he would fly with her to any part of the world.
 she did not quite believe him, for she saw that he feared her, and she
 began to suspect that his were the protestations of a coward to gain time.
 but she showed him no doubts.
 she only watched his movements day by day, and always held herself ready
 to act promptly.
 when philip came into the presence of this attractive woman, he could not
 realize that she was the subject of all the scandal he had heard. she
 received him with quite the old hawkeye openness and cordiality, and fell
 to talking at once of their little acquaintance there; and it seemed
 impossible that he could ever say to her what he had come determined to
 say. such a man as philip has only one standard by which to judge women.
 laura recognized that fact no doubt. the better part of her woman’s nature
 saw it. such a man might, years ago, not now, have changed her nature, and
 made the issue of her life so different, even after her cruel abandonment.
 she had a dim feeling of this, and she would like now to stand well with
 him. the spark of truth and honor that was left in her was elicited by his
 presence. it was this influence that governed her conduct in this
 interview.
 “i have come,” said philip in his direct manner, “from my friend mr.
 brierly. you are not ignorant of his feeling towards you?”
 “perhaps not.”
 “but perhaps you do not know, you who have so much admiration, how sincere
 and overmastering his love is for you?” philip would not have spoken so
 plainly, if he had in mind anything except to draw from laura something
 that would end harry’s passion.
 “and is sincere love so rare, mr. sterling?” asked laura, moving her foot
 a little, and speaking with a shade of sarcasm.
 “perhaps not in washington,” replied philip,—tempted into a similar
 tone. “excuse my bluntness,” he continued, “but would the knowledge of his
 love; would his devotion, make any difference to you in your washington
 life?”
 “in respect to what?” asked laura quickly.
 “well, to others. i won’t equivocate—to col. selby?”
 laura’s face flushed with anger, or shame; she looked steadily at philip
 and began,
 “by what right, sir,—”
 “by the right of friendship,” interrupted philip stoutly. “it may matter
 little to you. it is everything to him. he has a quixotic notion that you
 would turn back from what is before you for his sake. you cannot be
 ignorant of what all the city is talking of.” philip said this
 determinedly and with some bitterness.
 it was a full minute before laura spoke. both had risen, philip as if to
 go, and laura in suppressed excitement. when she spoke her voice was very
 unsteady, and she looked down.
 “yes, i know. i perfectly understand what you mean. mr. brierly is nothing—simply
 nothing. he is a moth singed, that is all—the trifler with women
 thought he was a wasp. i have no pity for him, not the least. you may tell
 him not to make a fool of himself, and to keep away. i say this on your
 account, not his. you are not like him. it is enough for me that you want
 it so. mr. sterling,” she continued, looking up; and there were tears in
 her eyes that contradicted the hardness of her language, “you might not
 pity him if you knew my history; perhaps you would not wonder at some
 things you hear. no; it is useless to ask me why it must be so. you can’t
 make a life over—society wouldn’t let you if you would—and
 mine must be lived as it is. there, sir, i’m not offended; but it is
 useless for you to say anything more.”
 philip went away with his heart lightened about harry, but profoundly
 saddened by the glimpse of what this woman might have been. he told harry
 all that was necessary of the conversation—she was bent on going her
 own way, he had not the ghost of a chance—he was a fool, she had
 said, for thinking he had.
 and harry accepted it meekly, and made up his own mind that philip didn’t
 know much about women.
 the galleries of the house were packed, on the momentous day, not because
 the reporting of an important bill back by a committee was a thing to be
 excited about, if the bill were going to take the ordinary course
 afterward; it would be like getting excited over the empaneling of a
 coroner’s jury in a murder case, instead of saving up one’s emotions for
 the grander occasion of the hanging of the accused, two years later, after
 all the tedious forms of law had been gone through with.
 but suppose you understand that this coroner’s jury is going to turn out
 to be a vigilance committee in disguise, who will hear testimony for an
 hour and then hang the murderer on the spot? that puts a different aspect
 upon the matter. now it was whispered that the legitimate forms of
 procedure usual in the house, and which keep a bill hanging along for days
 and even weeks, before it is finally passed upon, were going to be
 overruled, in this case, and short work made of the measure; and so, what
 was beginning as a mere inquest might, turn out to be something very
 different.
 in the course of the day’s business the order of “reports of committees”
 was finally reached and when the weary crowds heard that glad announcement
 issue from the speaker’s lips they ceased to fret at the dragging delay,
 and plucked up spirit. the chairman of the committee on benevolent
 appropriations rose and made his report, and just then a blue-uniformed
 brass-mounted little page put a note into his hand.
 it was from senator dilworthy, who had appeared upon the floor of the
 house for a moment and flitted away again:
 “everybody expects a grand assault in force; no doubt you believe, as i
 certainly do, that it is the thing to do; we are strong, and everything
 is hot for the contest. trollop’s espousal of our cause has immensely
 helped us and we grow in power constantly. ten of the opposition were
 called away from town about noon,(but—so it is said—only for
 one day). six others are sick, but expect to be about again tomorrow or
 next day, a friend tells me. a bold onslaught is worth trying. go for a
 suspension of the rules! you will find we can swing a two-thirds vote—i
 am perfectly satisfied of it. the lord’s truth will prevail. 
 mr. buckstone had reported the bills from his committee, one by one,
 leaving the bill to the last. when the house had voted upon the acceptance
 or rejection of the report upon all but it, and the question now being
 upon its disposal—mr. buckstone begged that the house would give its
 attention to a few remarks which he desired to make. his committee had
 instructed him to report the bill favorably; he wished to explain the
 nature of the measure, and thus justify the committee’s action; the
 hostility roused by the press would then disappear, and the bill would
 shine forth in its true and noble character. he said that its provisions
 were simple. it incorporated the knobs industrial university, locating it
 in east tennessee, declaring it open to all persons without distinction of
 sex, color or religion, and committing its management to a board of
 perpetual trustees, with power to fill vacancies in their own number. it
 provided for the erection of certain buildings for the university,
 dormitories, lecture-halls, museums, libraries, laboratories, work-shops,
 furnaces, and mills. it provided also for the purchase of sixty-five
 thousand acres of land, (fully described) for the purposes of the
 university, in the knobs of east tennessee. and it appropriated [blank]
 dollars for the purchase of the land, which should be the property of the
 national trustees in trust for the uses named.
 every effort had been made to secure the refusal of the whole amount of
 the property of the hawkins heirs in the knobs, some seventy-five thousand
 acres mr. buckstone said. but mr. washington hawkins (one of the heirs)
 objected. he was, indeed, very reluctant to sell any part of the land at
 any price; and indeed—this reluctance was justifiable when one
 considers how constantly and how greatly the property is rising in value.
 what the south needed, continued mr. buckstone, was skilled labor. without
 that it would be unable to develop its mines, build its roads, work to
 advantage and without great waste its fruitful land, establish
 manufactures or enter upon a prosperous industrial career. its laborers
 were almost altogether unskilled. change them into intelligent, trained
 workmen, and you increased at once the capital, the resources of the
 entire south, which would enter upon a prosperity hitherto unknown. in
 five years the increase in local wealth would not only reimburse the
 government for the outlay in this appropriation, but pour untold wealth
 into the treasury.
 this was the material view, and the least important in the honorable
 gentleman’s opinion. [here he referred to some notes furnished him by
 senator dilworthy, and then continued.] god had given us the care of these
 colored millions. what account should we render to him of our stewardship?
 we had made them free. should we leave them ignorant? we had cast them
 upon their own resources. should we leave them without tools? we could not
 tell what the intentions of providence are in regard to these peculiar
 people, but our duty was plain. the knobs industrial university would be a
 vast school of modern science and practice, worthy of a great nation. it
 would combine the advantages of zurich, freiburg, creuzot and the
 sheffield scientific. providence had apparently reserved and set apart the
 knobs of east tennessee for this purpose. what else were they for? was it
 not wonderful that for more than thirty years, over a generation, the
 choicest portion of them had remained in one family, untouched, as if,
 separated for some great use!
 it might be asked why the government should buy this land, when it had
 millions of acres, more than the railroad companies desired, which, it
 might devote to this purpose? he answered, that the government had no such
 tract of land as this. it had nothing comparable to it for the purposes of
 the university: this was to be a school of mining, of engineering, of the
 working of metals, of chemistry, zoology, botany, manufactures,
 agriculture, in short of all the complicated industries that make a state
 great. there was no place for the location of such a school like the knobs
 of east tennessee. the hills abounded in metals of all sorts, iron in all
 its combinations, copper, bismuth, gold and silver in small quantities,
 platinum he believed, tin, aluminium; it was covered with forests and
 strange plants; in the woods were found the coon, the opossum, the fox,
 the deer and many other animals who roamed in the domain of natural
 history; coal existed in enormous quantity and no doubt oil; it was such a
 place for the practice of agricultural experiments that any student who
 had been successful there would have an easy task in any other portion of
 the country.
 no place offered equal facilities for experiments in mining, metallurgy,
 engineering. he expected to live to see the day, when the youth of the
 south would resort to its mines, its workshops, its laboratories, its
 furnaces and factories for practical instruction in all the great
 industrial pursuits.
 a noisy and rather ill-natured debate followed, now, and lasted hour after
 hour. the friends of the bill were instructed by the leaders to make no
 effort to check it; it was deemed better strategy to tire out the
 opposition; it was decided to vote down every proposition to adjourn, and
 so continue the sitting into the night; opponents might desert, then, one
 by one and weaken their party, for they had no personal stake in the bill.
 sunset came, and still the fight went on; the gas was lit, the crowd in
 the galleries began to thin, but the contest continued; the crowd
 returned, by and by, with hunger and thirst appeased, and aggravated the
 hungry and thirsty house by looking contented and comfortable; but still
 the wrangle lost nothing of its bitterness. recesses were moved
 plaintively by the opposition, and invariably voted down by the university
 army.
 at midnight the house presented a spectacle calculated to interest a
 stranger. the great galleries were still thronged—though only with
 men, now; the bright colors that had made them look like hanging gardens
 were gone, with the ladies. the reporters’ gallery, was merely occupied by
 one or two watchful sentinels of the quill-driving guild; the main body
 cared nothing for a debate that had dwindled to a mere vaporing of dull
 speakers and now and then a brief quarrel over a point of order; but there
 was an unusually large attendance of journalists in the reporters’
 waiting-room, chatting, smoking, and keeping on the ‘qui vive’ for the
 general irruption of the congressional volcano that must come when the
 time was ripe for it. senator dilworthy and philip were in the diplomatic
 gallery; washington sat in the public gallery, and col. sellers was, not
 far away. the colonel had been flying about the corridors and
 button-holing congressmen all the evening, and believed that he had
 accomplished a world of valuable service; but fatigue was telling upon
 him, now, and he was quiet and speechless—for once. below, a few
 senators lounged upon the sofas set apart for visitors, and talked with
 idle congressmen. a dreary member was speaking; the presiding officer was
 nodding; here and there little knots of members stood in the aisles,
 whispering together; all about the house others sat in all the various
 attitudes that express weariness; some, tilted back, had one or more legs
 disposed upon their desks; some sharpened pencils indolently; some
 scribbled aimlessly; some yawned and stretched; a great many lay upon
 their breasts upon the desks, sound asleep and gently snoring. the
 flooding gaslight from the fancifully wrought roof poured down upon the
 tranquil scene. hardly a sound disturbed the stillness, save the
 monotonous eloquence of the gentleman who occupied the floor. now and then
 a warrior of the opposition broke down under the pressure, gave it up, and
 went home.
 mr. buckstone began to think it might be safe, now, to “proceed to
 business.” he consulted with trollop and one or two others. senator
 dilworthy descended to the floor of the house and they went to meet him.
 after a brief comparison of notes, the congressmen sought their seats and
 sent pages about the house with messages to friends. these latter
 instantly roused up, yawned, and began to look alert. the moment the floor
 was unoccupied, mr. buckstone rose, with an injured look, and said it was
 evident that the opponents of the bill were merely talking against time,
 hoping in this unbecoming way to tire out the friends of the measure and
 so defeat it. such conduct might be respectable enough in a village
 debating society, but it was trivial among statesmen, it was out of place
 in so august an assemblage as the house of representatives of the united
 states. the friends of the bill had been not only willing that its
 opponents should express their opinions, but had strongly desired it. they
 courted the fullest and freest discussion; but it seemed to him that this
 fairness was but illy appreciated, since gentlemen were capable of taking
 advantage of it for selfish and unworthy ends. this trifling had gone far
 enough. he called for the question.
 the instant mr. buckstone sat down, the storm burst forth. a dozen
 gentlemen sprang to their feet.
 “mr. speaker!”
 “mr. speaker!”
 “mr. speaker!”
 “order! order! order! question! question!”
 the sharp blows of the speaker’s gavel rose above the din.
 the “previous question,” that hated gag, was moved and carried. all debate
 came to a sudden end, of course. triumph no. .
 then the vote was taken on the adoption of the report and it carried by a
 surprising majority.
 mr. buckstone got the floor again and moved that the rules be suspended
 and the bill read a first time.
 mr. trollop—“second the motion!”
 the speaker—“it is moved and—”
 clamor of voices. “move we adjourn! second the motion! adjourn! adjourn!
 order! order!”
 the speaker, (after using his gavel vigorously)—“it is moved and
 seconded that the house do now adjourn. all those in favor—”
 voices—“division! division! ayes and nays! ayes and nays!”
 it was decided to vote upon the adjournment by ayes and nays. this was in
 earnest. the excitement was furious. the galleries were in commotion in an
 instant, the reporters swarmed to their places. idling members of the
 house flocked to their seats, nervous gentlemen sprang to their feet,
 pages flew hither and thither, life and animation were visible everywhere,
 all the long ranks of faces in the building were kindled.
 “this thing decides it!” thought mr. buckstone; “but let the fight
 proceed.”
 the voting began, and every sound ceased but the calling if the names and
 the “aye!” “no!” “no!” “aye!” of the responses. there was not a movement
 in the house; the people seemed to hold their breath.
 the voting ceased, and then there was an interval of dead silence while
 the clerk made up his count. there was a two-thirds vote on the university
 side—and two over.
 the speaker—“the rules are suspended, the motion is carried—first
 reading of the bill!”
 by one impulse the galleries broke forth into stormy applause, and even
 some of the members of the house were not wholly able to restrain their
 feelings. the speaker’s gavel came to the rescue and his clear voice
 followed:
 “order, gentlemen—! the house will come to order! if spectators
 offend again, the sergeant-at-arms will clear the galleries!”
 then he cast his eyes aloft and gazed at some object attentively for a
 moment. all eyes followed the direction of the speaker’s, and then there
 was a general titter. the speaker said:
 “let the sergeant-at arms inform the gentleman that his conduct is an
 infringement of the dignity of the house—and one which is not
 warranted by the state of the weather.” poor sellers was the culprit. he
 sat in the front seat of the gallery, with his arms and his tired body
 overflowing the balustrade—sound asleep, dead to all excitements,
 all disturbances. the fluctuations of the washington weather had
 influenced his dreams, perhaps, for during the recent tempest of applause
 he had hoisted his gingham umbrella, and calmly gone on with his slumbers.
 washington hawkins had seen the act, but was not near enough at hand to
 save his friend, and no one who was near enough desired to spoil the
 effect. but a neighbor stirred up the colonel, now that the house had its
 eye upon him, and the great speculator furled his tent like the arab. he
 said:
 “bless my soul, i’m so absent-minded when i get to thinking! i never wear
 an umbrella in the house—did anybody ‘notice it’? what-asleep?
 indeed? and did you wake me sir? thank you—thank you very much
 indeed. it might have fallen out of my hands and been injured. admirable
 article, sir—present from a friend in hong kong; one doesn’t come
 across silk like that in this country—it’s the real—young
 hyson, i’m told.”
 by this time the incident was forgotten, for the house was at war again.
 victory was almost in sight, now, and the friends of the bill threw
 themselves into their work with enthusiasm. they soon moved and carried
 its second reading, and after a strong, sharp fight, carried a motion to
 go into committee of the whole. the speaker left his place, of course, and
 a chairman was appointed.
 now the contest raged hotter than ever—for the authority that
 compels order when the house sits as a house, is greatly diminished when
 it sits as committee. the main fight came upon the filling of the blanks
 with the sum to be appropriated for the purchase of the land, of course.
 buckstone—“mr. chairman, i move you, sir, that the words ‘three
 millions of’ be inserted.”
 mr. hadley—“mr. chairman, i move that the words two and a half
 dollars be inserted.”
 mr. clawson—“mr. chairman, i move the insertion of the words five
 and twenty cents, as representing the true value of this barren and
 isolated tract of desolation.”
 the question, according to rule, was taken upon the smallest sum first. it
 was lost.
 then upon the next smallest sum. lost, also.
 and then upon the three millions. after a vigorous battle that lasted a
 considerable time, this motion was carried.
 then, clause by clause the bill was read, discussed, and amended in
 trifling particulars, and now the committee rose and reported.
 the moment the house had resumed its functions and received the report,
 mr. buckstone moved and carried the third reading of the bill.
 the same bitter war over the sum to be paid was fought over again, and now
 that the ayes and nays could be called and placed on record, every man was
 compelled to vote by name on the three millions, and indeed on every
 paragraph of the bill from the enacting clause straight through. but as
 before, the friends of the measure stood firm and voted in a solid body
 every time, and so did its enemies.
 the supreme moment was come, now, but so sure was the result that not even
 a voice was raised to interpose an adjournment. the enemy were totally
 demoralized. the bill was put upon its final passage almost without
 dissent, and the calling of the ayes and nays began. when it was ended the
 triumph was complete—the two-thirds vote held good, and a veto was
 impossible, as far as the house was concerned!
 mr. buckstone resolved that now that the nail was driven home, he would
 clinch it on the other side and make it stay forever. he moved a
 reconsideration of the vote by which the bill had passed. the motion was
 lost, of course, and the great industrial university act was an
 accomplished fact as far as it was in the power of the house of
 representatives to make it so.
 there was no need to move an adjournment. the instant the last motion was
 decided, the enemies of the university rose and flocked out of the hall,
 talking angrily, and its friends flocked after them jubilant and
 congratulatory. the galleries disgorged their burden, and presently the
 house was silent and deserted.
 when col. sellers and washington stepped out of the building they were
 surprised to find that the daylight was old and the sun well up. said the
 colonel:
 “give me your hand, my boy! you’re all right at last! you’re a
 millionaire! at least you’re going to be. the thing is dead sure. don’t
 you bother about the senate. leave me and dilworthy to take care of that.
 run along home, now, and tell laura. lord, it’s magnificent news—perfectly
 magnificent! run, now. i’ll telegraph my wife. she must come here and help
 me build a house. everything’s all right now!”
 washington was so dazed by his good fortune and so bewildered by the gaudy
 pageant of dreams that was already trailing its long ranks through his
 brain, that he wandered he knew not where, and so loitered by the way that
 when at last he reached home he woke to a sudden annoyance in the fact
 that his news must be old to laura, now, for of course senator dilworthy
 must have already been home and told her an hour before. he knocked at her
 door, but there was no answer.
 “that is like the duchess,” said he. “always cool; a body can’t excite
 her-can’t keep her excited, anyway. now she has gone off to sleep again,
 as comfortably as if she were used to picking up a million dollars every
 day or two.”
 then he went to bed. but he could not sleep; so he got up and wrote a
 long, rapturous letter to louise, and another to his mother. and he closed
 both to much the same effect:
 “laura will be queen of america, now, and she will be applauded, and
 honored and petted by the whole nation. her name will be in every one’s
 mouth more than ever, and how they will court her and quote her bright
 speeches. and mine, too, i suppose; though they do that more already,
 than they really seem to deserve. oh, the world is so bright, now, and
 so cheery; the clouds are all gone, our long struggle is ended, our
 troubles are all over. nothing can ever make us unhappy any more. you
 dear faithful ones will have the reward of your patient waiting now. how
 father’s wisdom is proven at last! and how i repent me, that there have
 been times when i lost faith and said, the blessing he stored up for us
 a tedious generation ago was but a long-drawn curse, a blight upon us
 all. but everything is well, now—we are done with poverty, sad
 toil, weariness and heart-break; all the world is filled with sunshine.”
 philip left the capitol and walked up pennsylvania avenue in company with
 senator dilworthy. it was a bright spring morning, the air was soft and
 inspiring; in the deepening wayside green, the pink flush of the
 blossoming peach trees, the soft suffusion on the heights of arlington,
 and the breath of the warm south wind was apparent, the annual miracle of
 the resurrection of the earth.
 the senator took off his hat and seemed to open his soul to the sweet
 influences of the morning. after the heat and noise of the chamber, under
 its dull gas-illuminated glass canopy, and the all night struggle of
 passion and feverish excitement there, the open, tranquil world seemed
 like heaven. the senator was not in an exultant mood, but rather in a
 condition of holy joy, befitting a christian statesman whose benevolent
 plans providence has made its own and stamped with approval. the great
 battle had been fought, but the measure had still to encounter the
 scrutiny of the senate, and providence sometimes acts differently in the
 two houses. still the senator was tranquil, for he knew that there is an
 esprit de corps in the senate which does not exist in the house, the
 effect of which is to make the members complaisant towards the projects of
 each other, and to extend a mutual aid which in a more vulgar body would
 be called “log-rolling.”
 “it is, under providence, a good night’s work, mr. sterling. the
 government has founded an institution which will remove half the
 difficulty from the southern problem. and it is a good thing for the
 hawkins heirs, a very good thing. laura will be almost a millionaire.”
 “do you think, mr. dilworthy, that the hawkinses will get much of the
 money?” asked philip innocently, remembering the fate of the columbus
 river appropriation.
 the senator looked at his companion scrutinizingly for a moment to see if
 he meant anything personal, and then replied,
 “undoubtedly, undoubtedly. i have had their interests greatly at heart.
 there will of course be a few expenses, but the widow and orphans will
 realize all that mr. hawkins, dreamed of for them.”
 the birds were singing as they crossed the presidential square, now bright
 with its green turf and tender foliage. after the two had gained the steps
 of the senator’s house they stood a moment, looking upon the lovely
 prospect:
 “it is like the peace of god,” said the senator devoutly.
 entering the house, the senator called a servant and said, “tell miss
 laura that we are waiting to see her. i ought to have sent a messenger on
 horseback half an hour ago,” he added to philip, “she will be transported
 with our victory. you must stop to breakfast, and see the excitement.” the
 servant soon came back, with a wondering look and reported,
 “miss laura ain’t dah, sah. i reckon she hain’t been dah all night!”
 the senator and philip both started up. in laura’s room there were the
 marks of a confused and hasty departure, drawers half open, little
 articles strewn on the floor. the bed had not been disturbed. upon inquiry
 it appeared that laura had not been at dinner, excusing herself to mrs.
 dilworthy on the plea of a violent headache; that she made a request to
 the servants that she might not be disturbed.
 the senator was astounded. philip thought at once of col. selby. could
 laura have run away with him? the senator thought not. in fact it could
 not be. gen. leffenwell, the member from new orleans, had casually told
 him at the house last night that selby and his family went to new york
 yesterday morning and were to sail for europe to-day.
 philip had another idea which, he did not mention. he seized his hat, and
 saying that he would go and see what he could learn, ran to the lodgings
 of harry; whom he had not seen since yesterday afternoon, when he left him
 to go to the house.
 harry was not in. he had gone out with a hand-bag before six o’clock
 yesterday, saying that he had to go to new york, but should return next
 day. in harry’s-room on the table philip found this note:
 “dear mr. brierly:—can you meet me at the six o’clock train, and
 be my escort to new york? i have to go about this university bill, the
 vote of an absent member we must have here, senator dilworthy cannot go.
 yours,
 “confound it,” said phillip, “the noodle has fallen into her trap. and she
 promised she would let him alone.”
 he only stopped to send a note to senator dilworthy, telling him what he
 had found, and that he should go at once to new york, and then hastened to
 the railway station. he had to wait an hour for a train, and when it did
 start it seemed to go at a snail’s pace.
 philip was devoured with anxiety. where could they have gone? what was
 laura’s object in taking harry? had the flight anything to do with selby?
 would harry be such a fool as to be dragged into some public scandal?
 it seemed as if the train would never reach baltimore. then there was a
 long delay at havre de grace. a hot box had to be cooled at wilmington.
 would it never get on? only in passing around the city of philadelphia did
 the train not seem to go slow. philip stood upon the platform and watched
 for the boltons’ house, fancied he could distinguish its roof among the
 trees, and wondered how ruth would feel if she knew he was so near her.
 then came jersey, everlasting jersey, stupid irritating jersey, where the
 passengers are always asking which line they are on, and where they are to
 come out, and whether they have yet reached elizabeth. launched into
 jersey, one has a vague notion that he is on many lines and no one in
 particular, and that he is liable at any moment to come to elizabeth. he
 has no notion what elizabeth is, and always resolves that the next time he
 goes that way, he will look out of the window and see what it is like; but
 he never does. or if he does, he probably finds that it is princeton or
 something of that sort. he gets annoyed, and never can see the use of
 having different names for stations in jersey. by and by there is newark,
 three or four newarks apparently; then marshes; then long rock cuttings
 devoted to the advertisements of patent medicines and ready-made,
 clothing, and new york tonics for jersey agues, and jersey city is
 reached.
 on the ferry-boat philip bought an evening paper from a boy crying “’ere’s
 the evening gram, all about the murder,” and with breathless haste—ran
 his eyes over the following:
 this morning occurred another of those shocking murders which have
 become the almost daily food of the newspapers, the direct result of the
 socialistic doctrines and woman’s rights agitations, which have made
 every woman the avenger of her own wrongs, and all society the hunting
 ground for her victims. about nine o’clock a lady
 deliberately shot a man dead in the public parlor of the southern hotel,
 coolly remarking, as she threw down her revolver and permitted herself
 to be taken into custody, “he brought it on himself.” our reporters were
 immediately dispatched to the scene of the tragedy, and gathered the
 following particulars. yesterday afternoon arrived at the
 hotel from washington, col. george selby and family, who had taken
 passage and were to sail at noon to-day in the steamer scotia for
 england. the colonel was a handsome man about forty, a gentleman of
 wealth and high social position, a resident of new orleans. he served
 with distinction in the confederate army, and received a wound in the
 leg from which he has never entirely recovered, being obliged to use a
 cane in locomotion. this morning at about nine o’clock, a
 lady, accompanied by a gentleman, called at the office of the hotel and
 asked for col. selby. the colonel was at breakfast. would the clerk tell
 him that a lady and gentleman wished to see him for a moment in the
 parlor? the clerk says that the gentleman asked her, “what do you want
 to see him for?” and that she replied, “he is going to europe, and i
 ought to just say good by." col. selby was informed; and the
 lady and gentleman were shown to the parlor, in which were at the time
 three or four other persons. five minutes after two shots were fired in
 quick succession, and there was a rush to the parlor from which the
 reports came. col. selby was found lying on the floor,
 bleeding, but not dead. two gentlemen, who had just come in, had seized
 the lady, who made no resistance, and she was at once given in charge of
 a police officer who arrived. the persons who were in the parlor agree
 substantially as to what occurred. they had happened to be looking
 towards the door when the man—col. selby—entered with his
 cane, and they looked at him, because he stopped as if surprised and
 frightened, and made a backward movement. at the same moment the lady in
 the bonnet advanced towards him and said something like, “george, will
 you go with me?” he replied, throwing up his hand and retreating, “my
 god i can’t, don’t fire,” and the next instants two shots were heard and
 he fell. the lady appeared to be beside herself with rage or excitement,
 and trembled very much when the gentlemen took hold of her; it was to
 them she said, “he brought it on himself." col. selby was
 carried at once to his room and dr. puffer, the eminent surgeon was sent
 for. it was found that he was shot through the breast and through the
 abdomen. other aid was summoned, but the wounds were mortal, and col
 selby expired in an hour, in pain, but his mind was clear to the last
 and he made a full deposition. the substance of it was that his
 murderess is a miss laura hawkins, whom he had known at washington as a
 lobbyist and had some business with her. she had followed him with her
 attentions and solicitations, and had endeavored to make him desert his
 wife and go to europe with her. when he resisted and avoided her she had
 threatened him. only the day before he left washington she had declared
 that he should never go out of the city alive without her. it
 seems to have been a deliberate and premeditated murder, the woman
 following him to washington on purpose to commit it. we learn
 that the murderess, who is a woman of dazzling and transcendent beauty
 and about twenty six or seven, is a niece of senator dilworthy at whose
 house she has been spending the winter. she belongs to a high southern
 family, and has the reputation of being an heiress. like some other
 great beauties and belles in washington however there have been whispers
 that she had something to do with the lobby. if we mistake not we have
 heard her name mentioned in connection with the sale of the tennessee
 lands to the knobs university, the bill for which passed the house last
 night. her companion is mr. harry brierly, a new york dandy,
 who has been in washington. his connection with her and with this
 tragedy is not known, but he was also taken into custody, and will be
 detained at least as a witness. p. s. one of the persons
 present in the parlor says that after laura hawkins had fired twice, she
 turned the pistol towards herself, but that brierly sprung and caught it
 from her hand, and that it was he who threw it on the floor. 
 further particulars with full biographies of all the parties in our next
 edition.
 philip hastened at once to the southern hotel, where he found still a
 great state of excitement, and a thousand different and exaggerated
 stories passing from mouth to mouth. the witnesses of the event had told
 it over so many times that they had worked it up into a most dramatic
 scene, and embellished it with whatever could heighten its awfulness.
 outsiders had taken up invention also. the colonel’s wife had gone insane,
 they said. the children had rushed into the parlor and rolled themselves
 in their father’s blood. the hotel clerk said that he noticed there was
 murder in the woman’s eye when he saw her. a person who had met the woman
 on the stairs felt a creeping sensation. some thought brierly was an
 accomplice, and that he had set the woman on to kill his rival. some said
 the woman showed the calmness and indifference of insanity.
 philip learned that harry and laura had both been taken to the city
 prison, and he went there; but he was not admitted. not being a newspaper
 reporter, he could not see either of them that night; but the officer
 questioned him suspiciously and asked him who he was. he might perhaps see
 brierly in the morning.
 the latest editions of the evening papers had the result of the inquest.
 it was a plain enough case for the jury, but they sat over it a long time,
 listening to the wrangling of the physicians. dr. puffer insisted that the
 man died from the effects of the wound in the chest. dr. dobb as strongly
 insisted that the wound in the abdomen caused death. dr. golightly
 suggested that in his opinion death ensued from a complication of the two
 wounds and perhaps other causes. he examined the table waiter, as to
 whether col. selby ate any breakfast, and what he ate, and if he had any
 appetite.
 the jury finally threw themselves back upon the indisputable fact that
 selby was dead, that either wound would have killed him (admitted by the
 doctors), and rendered a verdict that he died from pistol-shot wounds
 inflicted by a pistol in the hands of laura hawkins.
 the morning papers blazed with big type, and overflowed with details of
 the murder. the accounts in the evening papers were only the premonitory
 drops to this mighty shower. the scene was dramatically worked up in
 column after column. there were sketches, biographical and historical.
 there were long “specials” from washington, giving a full history of
 laura’s career there, with the names of men with whom she was said to be
 intimate, a description of senator dilworthy’s residence and of his
 family, and of laura’s room in his house, and a sketch of the senator’s
 appearance and what he said. there was a great deal about her beauty, her
 accomplishments and her brilliant position in society, and her doubtful
 position in society. there was also an interview with col. sellers and
 another with washington hawkins, the brother of the murderess. one journal
 had a long dispatch from hawkeye, reporting the excitement in that quiet
 village and the reception of the awful intelligence.
 all the parties had been “interviewed.” there were reports of
 conversations with the clerk at the hotel; with the call-boy; with the
 waiter at table with all the witnesses, with the policeman, with the
 landlord (who wanted it understood that nothing of that sort had ever
 happened in his house before, although it had always been frequented by
 the best southern society,) and with mrs. col. selby. there were diagrams
 illustrating the scene of the shooting, and views of the hotel and street,
 and portraits of the parties.
 there were three minute and different statements from the doctors about
 the wounds, so technically worded that nobody could understand them. harry
 and laura had also been “interviewed” and there was a statement from
 philip himself, which a reporter had knocked him up out of bed at midnight
 to give, though how he found him, philip never could conjecture.
 what some of the journals lacked in suitable length for the occasion, they
 made up in encyclopaedic information about other similar murders and
 shootings.
 the statement from laura was not full, in fact it was fragmentary, and
 consisted of nine parts of, the reporter’s valuable observations to one of
 laura’s, and it was, as the reporter significantly remarked, “incoherent”,
 but it appeared that laura claimed to be selby’s wife, or to have been his
 wife, that he had deserted her and betrayed her, and that she was going to
 follow him to europe. when the reporter asked:
 “what made you shoot him, miss hawkins?”
 laura’s only reply was, very simply,
 “did i shoot him? do they say i shot him?”. and she would say no more.
 the news of the murder was made the excitement of the day. talk of it
 filled the town. the facts reported were scrutinized, the standing of the
 parties was discussed, the dozen different theories of the motive,
 broached in the newspapers, were disputed over.
 during the night subtle electricity had carried the tale over all the
 wires of the continent and under the sea; and in all villages and towns of
 the union, from the atlantic to the territories, and away up and down the
 pacific slope, and as far as london and paris and berlin, that morning the
 name of laura hawkins was spoken by millions and millions of people, while
 the owner of it—the sweet child of years ago, the beautiful queen of
 washington drawing rooms—sat shivering on her cot-bed in the
 darkness of a damp cell in the tombs.
 philip’s first effort was to get harry out of the tombs. he gained
 permission to see him, in the presence of an officer, during the day, and
 he found that hero very much cast down.
 “i never intended to come to such a place as this, old fellow,” he said to
 philip; “it’s no place for a gentleman, they’ve no idea how to treat a
 gentleman. look at that provender,” pointing to his uneaten prison ration.
 “they tell me i am detained as a witness, and i passed the night among a
 lot of cut-throats and dirty rascals—a pretty witness i’d be in a
 month spent in such company.”
 “but what under heavens,” asked philip, “induced you to come to new york
 with laura! what was it for?”
 “what for? why, she wanted me to come. i didn’t know anything about that
 cursed selby. she said it was lobby business for the university. i’d no
 idea what she was dragging me into that confounded hotel for. i suppose
 she knew that the southerners all go there, and thought she’d find her
 man. oh! lord, i wish i’d taken your advice. you might as well murder
 somebody and have the credit of it, as get into the newspapers the way i
 have. she’s pure devil, that girl. you ought to have seen how sweet she
 was on me; what an ass i am.”
 “well, i’m not going to dispute a poor prisoner. but the first thing is to
 get you out of this. i’ve brought the note laura wrote you, for one thing,
 and i’ve seen your uncle, and explained the truth of the case to him. he
 will be here soon.”
 harry’s uncle came, with other friends, and in the course of the day made
 such a showing to the authorities that harry was released, on giving bonds
 to appear as a witness when wanted. his spirits rose with their usual
 elasticity as soon as he was out of centre street, and he insisted on
 giving philip and his friends a royal supper at delmonico’s, an excess
 which was perhaps excusable in the rebound of his feelings, and which was
 committed with his usual reckless generosity. harry ordered the supper,
 and it is perhaps needless to say that philip paid the bill.
 neither of the young men felt like attempting to see laura that day, and
 she saw no company except the newspaper reporters, until the arrival of
 col. sellers and washington hawkins, who had hastened to new york with all
 speed.
 they found laura in a cell in the upper tier of the women’s department.
 the cell was somewhat larger than those in the men’s department, and might
 be eight feet by ten square, perhaps a little longer. it was of stone,
 floor and all, and tile roof was oven shaped. a narrow slit in the roof
 admitted sufficient light, and was the only means of ventilation; when the
 window was opened there was nothing to prevent the rain coming in. the
 only means of heating being from the corridor, when the door was ajar, the
 cell was chilly and at this time damp. it was whitewashed and clean, but
 it had a slight jail odor; its only furniture was a narrow iron bedstead,
 with a tick of straw and some blankets, not too clean.
 when col. sellers was conducted to this cell by the matron and looked in,
 his emotions quite overcame him, the tears rolled down his cheeks and his
 voice trembled so that he could hardly speak. washington was unable to say
 anything; he looked from laura to the miserable creatures who were walking
 in the corridor with unutterable disgust. laura was alone calm and
 self-contained, though she was not unmoved by the sight of the grief of
 her friends.
 “are you comfortable, laura?” was the first word the colonel could get
 out.
 “you see,” she replied. “i can’t say it’s exactly comfortable.”
 “are you cold?”
 “it is pretty chilly. the stone floor is like ice. it chills me through to
 step on it. i have to sit on the bed.”
 “poor thing, poor thing. and can you eat any thing?”
 “no, i am not hungry. i don’t know that i could eat any thing, i can’t eat
 that.”
 “oh dear,” continued the colonel, “it’s dreadful. but cheer up, dear,
 cheer up;” and the colonel broke down entirely.
 “but,” he went on, “we’ll stand by you. we’ll do everything for you. i
 know you couldn’t have meant to do it, it must have been insanity, you
 know, or something of that sort. you never did anything of the sort
 before.”
 laura smiled very faintly and said,
 “yes, it was something of that sort. it’s all a whirl. he was a villain;
 you don’t know.”
 “i’d rather have killed him myself, in a duel you know, all fair. i wish i
 had. but don’t you be down. we’ll get you the best counsel, the lawyers in
 new york can do anything; i’ve read of cases. but you must be comfortable
 now. we’ve brought some of your clothes, at the hotel. what else, can we
 get for you?”
 laura suggested that she would like some sheets for her bed, a piece of
 carpet to step on, and her meals sent in; and some books and writing
 materials if it was allowed. the colonel and washington promised to
 procure all these things, and then took their sorrowful leave, a great
 deal more affected than the criminal was, apparently, by her situation.
 the colonel told the matron as he went away that if she would look to
 laura’s comfort a little it shouldn’t be the worse for her; and to the
 turnkey who let them out he patronizingly said,
 “you’ve got a big establishment here, a credit to the city. i’ve got a
 friend in there—i shall see you again, sir.”
 by the next day something more of laura’s own story began to appear in the
 newspapers, colored and heightened by reporters’ rhetoric. some of them
 cast a lurid light upon the colonel’s career, and represented his victim
 as a beautiful avenger of her murdered innocence; and others pictured her
 as his willing paramour and pitiless slayer. her communications to the
 reporters were stopped by her lawyers as soon as they were retained and
 visited her, but this fact did not prevent—it may have facilitated—the
 appearance of casual paragraphs here and there which were likely to beget
 popular sympathy for the poor girl.
 the occasion did not pass without “improvement” by the leading journals;
 and philip preserved the editorial comments of three or four of them which
 pleased him most. these he used to read aloud to his friends afterwards
 and ask them to guess from which journal each of them had been cut. one
 began in this simple manner:—
 history never repeats itself, but the kaleidoscopic combinations of the
 pictured present often seem to be constructed out of the broken
 fragments of antique legends. washington is not corinth, and lais, the
 beautiful daughter of timandra, might not have been the prototype of the
 ravishing laura, daughter of the plebeian house of hawkins; but the
 orators add statesmen who were the purchasers of the favors of the one,
 may have been as incorruptible as the republican statesmen who learned
 how to love and how to vote from the sweet lips of the washington
 lobbyist; and perhaps the modern lais would never have departed from the
 national capital if there had been there even one republican xenocrates
 who resisted her blandishments. but here the parallel: fails. lais,
 wandering away with the youth rippostratus, is slain by the women who
 are jealous of her charms. laura, straying into her thessaly with the
 youth brierly, slays her other lover and becomes the champion of the
 wrongs of her sex.
 another journal began its editorial with less lyrical beauty, but with
 equal force. it closed as follows:—
 with laura hawkins, fair, fascinating and fatal, and with the dissolute
 colonel of a lost cause, who has reaped the harvest he sowed, we have
 nothing to do. but as the curtain rises on this awful tragedy, we catch
 a glimpse of the society at the capital under this administration, which
 we cannot contemplate without alarm for the fate of the republic.
 a third newspaper took up the subject in a different tone. it said:—
 our repeated predictions are verified. the pernicious doctrines which we
 have announced as prevailing in american society have been again
 illustrated. the name of the city is becoming a reproach. we may have
 done something in averting its ruin in our resolute exposure of the
 great frauds; we shall not be deterred from insisting that the outraged
 laws for the protection of human life shall be vindicated now, so that a
 person can walk the streets or enter the public houses, at least in the
 day-time, without the risk of a bullet through his brain.
 a fourth journal began its remarks as follows:—
 the fullness with which we present our readers this morning the details
 of the selby-hawkins homicide is a miracle of modern journalism.
 subsequent investigation can do little to fill out the picture. it is
 the old story. a beautiful woman shoots her absconding lover in
 cold-blood; and we shall doubtless learn in due time that if she was not
 as mad as a hare in this month of march, she was at least laboring under
 what is termed “momentary insanity.”
 it would not be too much to say that upon the first publication of the
 facts of the tragedy, there was an almost universal feeling of rage
 against the murderess in the tombs, and that reports of her beauty only
 heightened the indignation. it was as if she presumed upon that and upon
 her sex, to defy the law; and there was a fervent hope that the law would
 take its plain course.
 yet laura was not without friends, and some of them very influential too.
 she had in her keeping a great many secrets and a great many reputations,
 perhaps. who shall set himself up to judge human motives. why, indeed,
 might we not feel pity for a woman whose brilliant career had been so
 suddenly extinguished in misfortune and crime? those who had known her so
 well in washington might find it impossible to believe that the
 fascinating woman could have had murder in her heart, and would readily
 give ear to the current sentimentality about the temporary aberration of
 mind under the stress of personal calamity.
 senator dilworthy, was greatly shocked, of course, but he was full of
 charity for the erring.
 “we shall all need mercy,” he said. “laura as an inmate of my family was a
 most exemplary female, amiable, affectionate and truthful, perhaps too
 fond of gaiety, and neglectful of the externals of religion, but a woman
 of principle. she may have had experiences of which i am ignorant, but she
 could not have gone to this extremity if she had been in her own right
 mind.”
 to the senator’s credit be it said, he was willing to help laura and her
 family in this dreadful trial. she, herself, was not without money, for
 the washington lobbyist is not seldom more fortunate than the washington
 claimant, and she was able to procure a good many luxuries to mitigate the
 severity of her prison life. it enabled her also to have her own family
 near her, and to see some of them daily. the tender solicitude of her
 mother, her childlike grief, and her firm belief in the real guiltlessness
 of her daughter, touched even the custodians of the tombs who are enured
 to scenes of pathos.
 mrs. hawkins had hastened to her daughter as soon as she received money
 for the journey. she had no reproaches, she had only tenderness and pity.
 she could not shut out the dreadful facts of the case, but it had been
 enough for her that laura had said, in their first interview, “mother, i
 did not know what i was doing.” she obtained lodgings near the prison and
 devoted her life to her daughter, as if she had been really her own child.
 she would have remained in the prison day and night if it had been
 permitted. she was aged and feeble, but this great necessity seemed to
 give her new life.
 the pathetic story of the old lady’s ministrations, and her simplicity and
 faith, also got into the newspapers in time, and probably added to the
 pathos of this wrecked woman’s fate, which was beginning to be felt by the
 public. it was certain that she had champions who thought that her wrongs
 ought to be placed against her crime, and expressions of this feeling came
 to her in various ways. visitors came to see her, and gifts of fruit and
 flowers were sent, which brought some cheer into her hard and gloomy cell.
 laura had declined to see either philip or harry, somewhat to the former’s
 relief, who had a notion that she would necessarily feel humiliated by
 seeing him after breaking faith with him, but to the discomfiture of
 harry, who still felt her fascination, and thought her refusal heartless.
 he told philip that of course he had got through with such a woman, but he
 wanted to see her.
 philip, to keep him from some new foolishness, persuaded him to go with
 him to philadelphia; and, give his valuable services in the mining
 operations at ilium.
 the law took its course with laura. she was indicted for murder in the
 first degree and held for trial at the summer term. the two most
 distinguished criminal lawyers in the city had been retained for her
 defence, and to that the resolute woman devoted her days with a courage
 that rose as she consulted with her counsel and understood the methods of
 criminal procedure in new york.
 she was greatly depressed, however, by the news from washington. congress
 adjourned and her bill had failed to pass the senate. it must wait for the
 next session.
 it had been a bad winter, somehow, for the firm of pennybacker, bigler and
 small. these celebrated contractors usually made more money during the
 session of the legislature at harrisburg than upon all their summer work,
 and this winter had been unfruitful. it was unaccountable to bigler.
 “you see, mr. bolton,” he said, and philip was present at the
 conversation, “it puts us all out. it looks as if politics was played out.
 we’d counted on the year of simon’s re-election. and, now, he’s reelected,
 and i’ve yet to see the first man who’s the better for it.”
 “you don’t mean to say,” asked philip, “that he went in without paying
 anything?”
 “not a cent, not a dash cent, as i can hear,” repeated mr. bigler,
 indignantly. “i call it a swindle on the state. how it was done gets me. i
 never saw such a tight time for money in harrisburg.”
 “were there no combinations, no railroad jobs, no mining schemes put
 through in connection with the election?
 “not that i knew,” said bigler, shaking his head in disgust. “in fact it
 was openly said, that there was no money in the election. it’s perfectly
 unheard of.”
 “perhaps,” suggested philip, “it was effected on what the insurance
 companies call the ‘endowment,’ or the ‘paid up’ plan, by which a policy
 is secured after a certain time without further payment.”
 “you think then,” said mr. bolton smiling, “that a liberal and sagacious
 politician might own a legislature after a time, and not be bothered with
 keeping up his payments?”
 “whatever it is,” interrupted mr. bigler, “it’s devilish ingenious and
 goes ahead of my calculations; it’s cleaned me out, when i thought we had
 a dead sure thing. i tell you what it is, gentlemen, i shall go in for
 reform. things have got pretty mixed when a legislature will give away a
 united states senatorship.”
 it was melancholy, but mr. bigler was not a man to be crushed by one
 misfortune, or to lose his confidence in human nature, on one exhibition
 of apparent honesty. he was already on his feet again, or would be if mr.
 bolton could tide him over shoal water for ninety days.
 “we’ve got something with money in it,” he explained to mr. bolton, “got
 hold of it by good luck. we’ve got the entire contract for dobson’s patent
 pavement for the city of mobile. see here.”
 mr. bigler made some figures; contract so much, cost of work and materials
 so much, profits so much. at the end of three months the city would owe
 the company three hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars-two hundred
 thousand of that would be profits. the whole job was worth at least a
 million to the company—it might be more. there could be no mistake
 in these figures; here was the contract, mr. bolton knew what materials
 were worth and what the labor would cost.
 mr. bolton knew perfectly well from sore experience that there was always
 a mistake in figures when bigler or small made them, and he knew that he
 ought to send the fellow about his business. instead of that, he let him
 talk.
 they only wanted to raise fifty thousand dollars to carry on the contract—that
 expended they would have city bonds. mr. bolton said he hadn’t the money.
 but bigler could raise it on his name. mr. bolton said he had no right to
 put his family to that risk. but the entire contract could be assigned to
 him—the security was ample—it was a fortune to him if it was
 forfeited. besides mr. bigler had been unfortunate, he didn’t know where
 to look for the necessaries of life for his family. if he could only have
 one more chance, he was sure he could right himself. he begged for it.
 and mr. bolton yielded. he could never refuse such appeals. if he had
 befriended a man once and been cheated by him, that man appeared to have a
 claim upon him forever. he shrank, however, from telling his wife what he
 had done on this occasion, for he knew that if any person was more odious
 than small to his family it was bigler.
 “philip tells me,” mrs. bolton said that evening, “that the man bigler has
 been with thee again to-day. i hope thee will have nothing more to do with
 him.”
 “he has been very unfortunate,” replied mr. bolton, uneasily.
 “he is always unfortunate, and he is always getting thee into trouble. but
 thee didn’t listen to him again?”
 “well, mother, his family is in want, and i lent him my name—but i
 took ample security. the worst that can happen will be a little
 inconvenience.”
 mrs. bolton looked grave and anxious, but she did not complain or
 remonstrate; she knew what a “little inconvenience” meant, but she knew
 there was no help for it. if mr. bolton had been on his way to market to
 buy a dinner for his family with the only dollar he had in the world in
 his pocket, he would have given it to a chance beggar who asked him for
 it. mrs. bolton only asked (and the question showed that she was no mere
 provident than her husband where her heart was interested),
 “but has thee provided money for philip to use in opening the coal mine?”
 “yes, i have set apart as much as it ought to cost to open the mine, as
 much as we can afford to lose if no coal is found. philip has the control
 of it, as equal partner in the venture, deducting the capital invested. he
 has great confidence in his success, and i hope for his sake he won’t be
 disappointed.”
 philip could not but feel that he was treated very much like one of the
 bolton-family—by all except ruth. his mother, when he went home
 after his recovery from his accident, had affected to be very jealous of
 mrs. bolton, about whom and ruth she asked a thousand questions—an
 affectation of jealousy which no doubt concealed a real heartache, which
 comes to every mother when her son goes out into the world and forms new
 ties. and to mrs. sterling, a widow, living on a small income in a remote
 massachusetts village, philadelphia was a city of many splendors. all its
 inhabitants seemed highly favored, dwelling in ease and surrounded by
 superior advantages. some of her neighbors had relations living in
 philadelphia, and it seemed to them somehow a guarantee of respectability
 to have relations in philadelphia. mrs. sterling was not sorry to have
 philip make his way among such well-to-do people, and she was sure that no
 good fortune could be too good for his deserts.
 “so, sir,” said ruth, when philip came from new york, “you have been
 assisting in a pretty tragedy. i saw your name in the papers. is this
 woman a specimen of your western friends?”
 “my only assistance,” replied philip, a little annoyed, “was in trying to
 keep harry out of a bad scrape, and i failed after all. he walked into her
 trap, and he has been punished for it. i’m going to take him up to ilium
 to see if he won’t work steadily at one thing, and quit his nonsense.”
 “is she as beautiful as the newspapers say she is?”
 “i don’t know, she has a kind of beauty—she is not like—’
 “not like alice?”
 “well, she is brilliant; she was called the handsomest woman in washington—dashing,
 you know, and sarcastic and witty. ruth, do you believe a woman ever
 becomes a devil?”
 “men do, and i don’t know why women shouldn’t. but i never saw one.”
 “well, laura hawkins comes very near it. but it is dreadful to think of
 her fate.”
 “why, do you suppose they will hang a woman? do you suppose they will be
 so barbarous as that?”
 “i wasn’t thinking of that—it’s doubtful if a new york jury would
 find a woman guilty of any such crime. but to think of her life if she is
 acquitted.”
 “it is dreadful,” said ruth, thoughtfully, “but the worst of it is that
 you men do not want women educated to do anything, to be able to earn an
 honest living by their own exertions. they are educated as if they were
 always to be petted and supported, and there was never to be any such
 thing as misfortune. i suppose, now, that you would all choose to have me
 stay idly at home, and give up my profession.”
 “oh, no,” said philip, earnestly, “i respect your resolution. but, ruth,
 do you think you would be happier or do more good in following your
 profession than in having a home of your own?”
 “what is to hinder having a home of my own?”
 “nothing, perhaps, only you never would be in it—you would be away
 day and night, if you had any practice; and what sort of a home would that
 make for your husband?”
 “what sort of a home is it for the wife whose husband is always away
 riding about in his doctor’s gig?”
 “ah, you know that is not fair. the woman makes the home.”
 philip and ruth often had this sort of discussion, to which philip was
 always trying to give a personal turn. he was now about to go to ilium for
 the season, and he did not like to go without some assurance from ruth
 that she might perhaps love him some day; when he was worthy of it, and
 when he could offer her something better than a partnership in his
 poverty.
 “i should work with a great deal better heart, ruth,” he said the morning
 he was taking leave, “if i knew you cared for me a little.”
 ruth was looking down; the color came faintly to her cheeks, and she
 hesitated. she needn’t be looking down, he thought, for she was ever so
 much shorter than tall philip.
 “it’s not much of a place, ilium,” philip went on, as if a little
 geographical remark would fit in here as well as anything else, “and i
 shall have plenty of time to think over the responsibility i have taken,
 and—” his observation did not seem to be coming out any where.
 but ruth looked up, and there was a light in her eyes that quickened
 phil’s pulse. she took his hand, and said with serious sweetness:
 “thee mustn’t lose heart, philip.” and then she added, in another mood,
 “thee knows i graduate in the summer and shall have my diploma. and if any
 thing happens—mines explode sometimes—thee can send for me.
 farewell.”
 the opening of the ilium coal mine was begun with energy, but without many
 omens of success. philip was running a tunnel into the breast of the
 mountain, in faith that the coal stratum ran there as it ought to. how far
 he must go in he believed he knew, but no one could tell exactly. some of
 the miners said that they should probably go through the mountain, and
 that the hole could be used for a railway tunnel. the mining camp was a
 busy place at any rate. quite a settlement of board and log shanties had
 gone up, with a blacksmith shop, a small machine shop, and a temporary
 store for supplying the wants of the workmen. philip and harry pitched a
 commodious tent, and lived in the full enjoyment of the free life.
 there is no difficulty in digging a bole in the ground, if you have money
 enough to pay for the digging, but those who try this sort of work are
 always surprised at the large amount of money necessary to make a small
 hole. the earth is never willing to yield one product, hidden in her
 bosom, without an equivalent for it. and when a person asks of her coal,
 she is quite apt to require gold in exchange.
 it was exciting work for all concerned in it. as the tunnel advanced into
 the rock every day promised to be the golden day. this very blast might
 disclose the treasure.
 the work went on week after week, and at length during the night as well
 as the daytime. gangs relieved each other, and the tunnel was every hour,
 inch by inch and foot by foot, crawling into the mountain. philip was on
 the stretch of hope and excitement. every pay day he saw his funds melting
 away, and still there was only the faintest show of what the miners call
 “signs.”
 the life suited harry, whose buoyant hopefulness was never disturbed. he
 made endless calculations, which nobody could understand, of the probable
 position of the vein. he stood about among the workmen with the busiest
 air. when he was down at ilium he called himself the engineer of the
 works, and he used to spend hours smoking his pipe with the dutch landlord
 on the hotel porch, and astonishing the idlers there with the stories of
 his railroad operations in missouri. he talked with the landlord, too,
 about enlarging his hotel, and about buying some village lots, in the
 prospect of a rise, when the mine was opened. he taught the dutchman how
 to mix a great many cooling drinks for the summer time, and had a bill at
 the hotel, the growing length of which mr. dusenheimer contemplated with
 pleasant anticipations. mr. brierly was a very useful and cheering person
 wherever he went.
 midsummer arrived: philip could report to mr. bolton only progress, and
 this was not a cheerful message for him to send to philadelphia in reply
 to inquiries that he thought became more and more anxious. philip himself
 was a prey to the constant fear that the money would give out before the
 coal was struck.
 at this time harry was summoned to new york, to attend the trial of laura
 hawkins. it was possible that philip would have to go also, her lawyer
 wrote, but they hoped for a postponement. there was important evidence
 that they could not yet obtain, and he hoped the judge would not force
 them to a trial unprepared. there were many reasons for a delay, reasons
 which of course are never mentioned, but which it would seem that a new
 york judge sometimes must understand, when he grants a postponement upon a
 motion that seems to the public altogether inadequate.
 harry went, but he soon came back. the trial was put off. every week we
 can gain, said the learned counsel, braham, improves our chances. the
 popular rage never lasts long.
 “we’ve struck it!”
 this was the announcement at the tent door that woke philip out of a sound
 sleep at dead of night, and shook all the sleepiness out of him in a
 trice.
 “what! where is it? when? coal? let me see it. what quality is it?” were
 some of the rapid questions that philip poured out as he hurriedly
 dressed. “harry, wake up, my boy, the coal train is coming. struck it, eh?
 let’s see?”
 the foreman put down his lantern, and handed philip a black lump. there
 was no mistake about it, it was the hard, shining anthracite, and its
 freshly fractured surface, glistened in the light like polished steel.
 diamond never shone with such lustre in the eyes of philip.
 harry was exuberant, but philip’s natural caution found expression in his
 next remark.
 “now, roberts, you are sure about this?”
 “what—sure that it’s coal?”
 “o, no, sure that it’s the main vein.”
 “well, yes. we took it to be that”
 “did you from the first?”
 “i can’t say we did at first. no, we didn’t. most of the indications were
 there, but not all of them, not all of them. so we thought we’d prospect a
 bit.”
 “well?”
 “it was tolerable thick, and looked as if it might be the vein—looked
 as if it ought to be the vein. then we went down on it a little. looked
 better all the time.”
 “when did you strike it?”
 “about ten o’clock.”
 “then you’ve been prospecting about four hours.”
 “yes, been sinking on it something over four hours.”
 “i’m afraid you couldn’t go down very far in four hours—could you?”
 “o yes—it’s a good deal broke up, nothing but picking and gadding
 stuff.”
 “well, it does look encouraging, sure enough—but then the lacking
 indications—”
 “i’d rather we had them, mr. sterling, but i’ve seen more than one good
 permanent mine struck without ’em in my time.”
 “well, that is encouraging too.”
 “yes, there was the union, the alabama and the black mohawk—all
 good, sound mines, you know—all just exactly like this one when we
 first struck them.”
 “well, i begin to feel a good deal more easy. i guess we’ve really got it.
 i remember hearing them tell about the black mohawk.”
 “i’m free to say that i believe it, and the men all think so too. they are
 all old hands at this business.”
 “come harry, let’s go up and look at it, just for the comfort of it,” said
 philip. they came back in the course of an hour, satisfied and happy.
 there was no more sleep for them that night. they lit their pipes, put a
 specimen of the coal on the table, and made it a kind of loadstone of
 thought and conversation.
 “of course,” said harry, “there will have to be a branch track built, and
 a ‘switch-back’ up the hill.”
 “yes, there will be no trouble about getting the money for that now. we
 could sell-out tomorrow for a handsome sum. that sort of coal doesn’t go
 begging within a mile of a rail-road. i wonder if mr. bolton would rather
 sell out or work it?”
 “oh, work it,” says harry, “probably the whole mountain is coal now you’ve
 got to it.”
 “possibly it might not be much of a vein after all,” suggested philip.
 “possibly it is; i’ll bet it’s forty feet thick. i told you. i knew the
 sort of thing as soon as i put my eyes on it.”
 philip’s next thought was to write to his friends and announce their good
 fortune. to mr. bolton he wrote a short, business letter, as calm as he
 could make it. they had found coal of excellent quality, but they could
 not yet tell with absolute certainty what the vein was. the prospecting
 was still going on. philip also wrote to ruth; but though this letter may
 have glowed, it was not with the heat of burning anthracite. he needed no
 artificial heat to warm his pen and kindle his ardor when he sat down to
 write to ruth. but it must be confessed that the words never flowed so
 easily before, and he ran on for an hour disporting in all the
 extravagance of his imagination. when ruth read it, she doubted if the
 fellow had not gone out of his senses. and it was not until she reached
 the postscript that she discovered the cause of the exhilaration. “p. s.—we
 have found coal.”
 the news couldn’t have come to mr. bolton in better time. he had never
 been so sorely pressed. a dozen schemes which he had in hand, any one of
 which might turn up a fortune, all languished, and each needed just a
 little more money to save that which had been invested. he hadn’t a piece
 of real estate that was not covered with mortgages, even to the wild tract
 which philip was experimenting on, and which had, no marketable value
 above the incumbrance on it.
 he had come home that day early, unusually dejected.
 “i am afraid,” he said to his wife, “that we shall have to give up our
 house. i don’t care for myself, but for thee and the children.”
 “that will be the least of misfortunes,” said mrs. bolton, cheerfully, “if
 thee can clear thyself from debt and anxiety, which is wearing thee out,
 we can live any where. thee knows we were never happier than when we were
 in a much humbler home.”
 “the truth is, margaret, that affair of bigler and small’s has come on me
 just when i couldn’t stand another ounce. they have made another failure
 of it. i might have known they would; and the sharpers, or fools, i don’t
 know which, have contrived to involve me for three times as much as the
 first obligation. the security is in my hands, but it is good for nothing
 to me. i have not the money to do anything with the contract.”
 ruth heard this dismal news without great surprise. she had long felt that
 they were living on a volcano, that might go in to active operation at any
 hour. inheriting from her father an active brain and the courage to
 undertake new things, she had little of his sanguine temperament which
 blinds one to difficulties and possible failures. she had little
 confidence in the many schemes which had been about to lift her father out
 of all his embarrassments and into great wealth, ever since she was a
 child; as she grew older, she rather wondered that they were as prosperous
 as they seemed to be, and that they did not all go to smash amid so many
 brilliant projects. she was nothing but a woman, and did not know how much
 of the business prosperity of the world is only a bubble of credit and
 speculation, one scheme helping to float another which is no better than
 it, and the whole liable to come to naught and confusion as soon as the
 busy brain that conceived them ceases its power to devise, or when some
 accident produces a sudden panic.
 “perhaps, i shall be the stay of the family, yet,” said ruth, with an
 approach to gaiety; “when we move into a little house in town, will thee
 let me put a little sign on the door: dr. ruth bolton? mrs. dr.
 longstreet, thee knows, has a great income.”
 “who will pay for the sign, ruth?” asked mr. bolton.
 a servant entered with the afternoon mail from the office. mr. bolton took
 his letters listlessly, dreading to open them. he knew well what they
 contained, new difficulties, more urgent demands for money.
 “oh, here is one from philip. poor fellow. i shall feel his disappointment
 as much as my own bad luck. it is hard to bear when one is young.”
 he opened the letter and read. as he read his face lightened, and he
 fetched such a sigh of relief, that mrs. bolton and ruth both exclaimed.
 “read that,” he cried, “philip has found coal!”
 the world was changed in a moment. one little sentence had done it. there
 was no more trouble. philip had found coal. that meant relief. that meant
 fortune. a great weight was taken off, and the spirits of the whole
 household rose magically. good money! beautiful demon of money, what an
 enchanter thou art! ruth felt that she was of less consequence in the
 household, now that philip had found coal, and perhaps she was not sorry
 to feel so.
 mr. bolton was ten years younger the next morning. he went into the city,
 and showed his letter on change. it was the sort of news his friends were
 quite willing to listen to. they took a new interest in him. if it was
 confirmed, bolton would come right up again. there would be no difficulty
 about his getting all the money he wanted. the money market did not seem
 to be half so tight as it was the day before. mr. bolton spent a very
 pleasant day in his office, and went home revolving some new plans, and
 the execution of some projects he had long been prevented from entering
 upon by the lack of money.
 the day had been spent by philip in no less excitement. by daylight, with
 philip’s letters to the mail, word had gone down to ilium that coal had
 been found, and very early a crowd of eager spectators had come up to see
 for themselves.
 the “prospecting” continued day and night for upwards of a week, and
 during the first four or five days the indications grew more and more
 promising, and the telegrams and letters kept mr. bolton duly posted. but
 at last a change came, and the promises began to fail with alarming
 rapidity. in the end it was demonstrated without the possibility of a
 doubt that the great “find” was nothing but a worthless seam.
 philip was cast down, all the more so because he had been so foolish as to
 send the news to philadelphia before he knew what he was writing about.
 and now he must contradict it. “it turns out to be only a mere seam,” he
 wrote, “but we look upon it as an indication of better further in.”
 alas! mr. bolton’s affairs could not wait for “indications.” the future
 might have a great deal in store, but the present was black and hopeless.
 it was doubtful if any sacrifice could save him from ruin. yet sacrifice
 he must make, and that instantly, in the hope of saving something from the
 wreck of his fortune.
 his lovely country home must go. that would bring the most ready money.
 the house that he had built with loving thought for each one of his
 family, as he planned its luxurious apartments and adorned it; the grounds
 that he had laid out, with so much delight in following the tastes of his
 wife, with whom the country, the cultivation of rare trees and flowers,
 the care of garden and lawn and conservatories were a passion almost; this
 home, which he had hoped his children would enjoy long after he had done
 with it, must go.
 the family bore the sacrifice better than he did. they declared in fact—women
 are such hypocrites—that they quite enjoyed the city (it was in
 august) after living so long in the country, that it was a thousand times
 more convenient in every respect; mrs. bolton said it was a relief from
 the worry of a large establishment, and ruth reminded her father that she
 should have had to come to town anyway before long.
 mr. bolton was relieved, exactly as a water-logged ship is lightened by
 throwing overboard the most valuable portion of the cargo—but the
 leak was not stopped. indeed his credit was injured instead of helped by
 the prudent step he had taken. it was regarded as a sure evidence of his
 embarrassment, and it was much more difficult for him to obtain help than
 if he had, instead of retrenching, launched into some new speculation.
 philip was greatly troubled, and exaggerated his own share in the bringing
 about of the calamity.
 “you must not look at it so!” mr. bolton wrote him. “you have neither
 helped nor hindered—but you know you may help by and by. it would
 have all happened just so, if we had never begun to dig that hole. that is
 only a drop. work away. i still have hope that something will occur to
 relieve me. at any rate we must not give up the mine, so long as we have
 any show.”
 alas! the relief did not come. new misfortunes came instead. when the
 extent of the bigler swindle was disclosed there was no more hope that mr.
 bolton could extricate himself, and he had, as an honest man, no resource
 except to surrender all his property for the benefit of his creditors.
 the autumn came and found philip working with diminished force but still
 with hope. he had again and again been encouraged by good “indications,”
 but he had again and again been disappointed. he could not go on much
 longer, and almost everybody except himself had thought it was useless to
 go on as long as he had been doing.
 when the news came of mr. bolton’s failure, of course the work stopped.
 the men were discharged, the tools were housed, the hopeful noise of
 pickman and driver ceased, and the mining camp had that desolate and
 mournful aspect which always hovers over a frustrated enterprise.
 philip sat down amid the ruins, and almost wished he were buried in them.
 how distant ruth was now from him, now, when she might need him most. how
 changed was all the philadelphia world, which had hitherto stood for the
 exemplification of happiness and prosperity.
 he still had faith that there was coal in that mountain. he made a picture
 of himself living there a hermit in a shanty by the tunnel, digging away
 with solitary pick and wheelbarrow, day after day and year after year,
 until he grew gray and aged, and was known in all that region as the old
 man of the mountain. perhaps some day—he felt it must be so some day—he
 should strike coal. but what if he did? who would be alive to care for it
 then? what would he care for it then? no, a man wants riches in his youth,
 when the world is fresh to him. he wondered why providence could not have
 reversed the usual process, and let the majority of men begin with wealth
 and gradually spend it, and die poor when they no longer needed it.
 harry went back to the city. it was evident that his services were no
 longer needed. indeed, he had letters from his uncle, which he did not
 read to philip, desiring him to go to san francisco to look after some
 government contracts in the harbor there.
 philip had to look about him for something to do; he was like adam; the
 world was all before him whereto choose. he made, before he went
 elsewhere, a somewhat painful visit to philadelphia, painful but yet not
 without its sweetnesses. the family had never shown him so much affection
 before; they all seemed to think his disappointment of more importance
 than their own misfortune. and there was that in ruth’s manner—in
 what she gave him and what she withheld—that would have made a hero
 of a very much less promising character than philip sterling.
 among the assets of the bolton property, the ilium tract was sold, and
 philip bought it in at the vendue, for a song, for no one cared to even
 undertake the mortgage on it except himself. he went away the owner of it,
 and had ample time before he reached home in november, to calculate how
 much poorer he was by possessing it.
 it is impossible for the historian, with even the best intentions, to
 control events or compel the persons of his narrative to act wisely or to
 be successful. it is easy to see how things might have been better
 managed; a very little change here and there would have made a very
 different history of this one now in hand.
 if philip had adopted some regular profession, even some trade, he might
 now be a prosperous editor or a conscientious plumber, or an honest
 lawyer, and have borrowed money at the saving’s bank and built a cottage,
 and be now furnishing it for the occupancy of ruth and himself. instead of
 this, with only a smattering of civil engineering, he is at his mother’s
 house, fretting and fuming over his ill-luck, and the hardness and,
 dishonesty of men, and thinking of nothing but how to get the coal out of
 the ilium hills.
 if senator dilworthy had not made that visit to hawkeye, the hawkins
 family and col. sellers would not now be dancing attendance upon congress,
 and endeavoring to tempt that immaculate body into one of those
 appropriations, for the benefit of its members, which the members find it
 so difficult to explain to their constituents; and laura would not be
 lying in the tombs, awaiting her trial for murder, and doing her best, by
 the help of able counsel, to corrupt the pure fountain of criminal
 procedure in new york.
 if henry brierly had been blown up on the first mississippi steamboat he
 set foot on, as the chances were that he would be, he and col. sellers
 never would have gone into the columbus navigation scheme, and probably
 never into the east tennessee land scheme, and he would not now be
 detained in new york from very important business operations on the
 pacific coast, for the sole purpose of giving evidence to convict of
 murder the only woman he ever loved half as much as he loves himself. if
 mr. bolton had said the little word “no” to mr. bigler, alice montague
 might now be spending the winter in philadelphia, and philip also (waiting
 to resume his mining operations in the spring); and ruth would not be an
 assistant in a philadelphia hospital, taxing her strength with arduous
 routine duties, day by day, in order to lighten a little the burdens that
 weigh upon her unfortunate family.
 it is altogether a bad business. an honest historian, who had progressed
 thus far, and traced everything to such a condition of disaster and
 suspension, might well be justified in ending his narrative and writing—“after
 this the deluge.” his only consolation would be in the reflection that he
 was not responsible for either characters or events.
 and the most annoying thought is that a little money, judiciously applied,
 would relieve the burdens and anxieties of most of these people; but
 affairs seem to be so arranged that money is most difficult to get when
 people need it most.
 a little of what mr. bolton has weakly given to unworthy people would now
 establish his family in a sort of comfort, and relieve ruth of the
 excessive toil for which she inherited no adequate physical vigor. a
 little money would make a prince of col. sellers; and a little more would
 calm the anxiety of washington hawkins about laura, for however the trial
 ended, he could feel sure of extricating her in the end. and if philip had
 a little money he could unlock the stone door in the mountain whence would
 issue a stream of shining riches. it needs a golden wand to strike that
 rock. if the knobs university bill could only go through, what a change
 would be wrought in the condition of most of the persons in this history.
 even philip himself would feel the good effects of it; for harry would
 have something and col. sellers would have something; and have not both
 these cautious people expressed a determination to take an interest in the
 ilium mine when they catch their larks?
 philip could not resist the inclination to pay a visit to fallkill. he had
 not been at the montague’s since the time he saw ruth there, and he wanted
 to consult the squire about an occupation. he was determined now to waste
 no more time in waiting on providence, but to go to work at something, if
 it were nothing better, than teaching in the fallkill seminary, or digging
 clams on hingham beach. perhaps he could read law in squire montague’s
 office while earning his bread as a teacher in the seminary.
 it was not altogether philip’s fault, let us own, that he was in this
 position. there are many young men like him in american society, of his
 age, opportunities, education and abilities, who have really been educated
 for nothing and have let themselves drift, in the hope that they will find
 somehow, and by some sudden turn of good luck, the golden road to fortune.
 he was not idle or lazy, he had energy and a disposition to carve his own
 way. but he was born into a time when all young men of his age caught the
 fever of speculation, and expected to get on in the world by the omission
 of some of the regular processes which have been appointed from of old.
 and examples were not wanting to encourage him. he saw people, all around
 him, poor yesterday, rich to-day, who had come into sudden opulence by
 some means which they could not have classified among any of the regular
 occupations of life. a war would give such a fellow a career and very
 likely fame. he might have been a “railroad man,” or a politician, or a
 land speculator, or one of those mysterious people who travel free on all
 rail-roads and steamboats, and are continually crossing and recrossing the
 atlantic, driven day and night about nobody knows what, and make a great
 deal of money by so doing. probably, at last, he sometimes thought with a
 whimsical smile, he should end by being an insurance agent, and asking
 people to insure their lives for his benefit.
 possibly philip did not think how much the attractions of fallkill were
 increased by the presence of alice there. he had known her so long, she
 had somehow grown into his life by habit, that he would expect the
 pleasure of her society without thinking much about it. latterly he never
 thought of her without thinking of ruth, and if he gave the subject any
 attention, it was probably in an undefined consciousness that, he had her
 sympathy in his love, and that she was always willing to hear him talk
 about it. if he ever wondered that alice herself was not in love and never
 spoke of the possibility of her own marriage, it was a transient thought
 for love did not seem necessary, exactly, to one so calm and evenly
 balanced and with so many resources in her herself.
 whatever her thoughts may have been they were unknown to philip, as they
 are to these historians; if she was seeming to be what she was not, and
 carrying a burden heavier than any one else carried, because she had to
 bear it alone, she was only doing what thousands of women do, with a
 self-renunciation and heroism, of which men, impatient and complaining,
 have no conception. have not these big babies with beards filled all
 literature with their outcries, their griefs and their lamentations? it is
 always the gentle sex which is hard and cruel and fickle and implacable.
 “do you think you would be contented to live in fallkill, and attend the
 county court?” asked alice, when philip had opened the budget of his new
 programme.
 “perhaps not always,” said philip, “i might go and practice in boston
 maybe, or go to chicago.”
 “or you might get elected to congress.”
 philip looked at alice to see if she was in earnest and not chaffing him.
 her face was quite sober. alice was one of those patriotic women in the
 rural districts, who think men are still selected for congress on account
 of qualifications for the office.
 “no,” said philip, “the chances are that a man cannot get into congress
 now without resorting to arts and means that should render him unfit to go
 there; of course there are exceptions; but do you know that i could not go
 into politics if i were a lawyer, without losing standing somewhat in my
 profession, and without raising at least a suspicion of my intentions and
 unselfishness? why, it is telegraphed all over the country and commented
 on as something wonderful if a congressman votes honestly and unselfishly
 and refuses to take advantage of his position to steal from the
 government.”
 “but,” insisted alice, “i should think it a noble ambition to go to
 congress, if it is so bad, and help reform it. i don’t believe it is as
 corrupt as the english parliament used to be, if there is any truth in the
 novels, and i suppose that is reformed.”
 “i’m sure i don’t know where the reform is to begin. i’ve seen a perfectly
 capable, honest man, time and again, run against an illiterate trickster,
 and get beaten. i suppose if the people wanted decent members of congress
 they would elect them. perhaps,” continued philip with a smile, “the women
 will have to vote.”
 “well, i should be willing to, if it were a necessity, just as i would go
 to war and do what i could, if the country couldn’t be saved otherwise,”
 said alice, with a spirit that surprised philip, well as he thought he
 knew her. “if i were a young gentleman in these times—”
 philip laughed outright. “it’s just what ruth used to say, ‘if she were a
 man.’ i wonder if all the young ladies are contemplating a change of sex.”
 “no, only a changed sex,” retorted alice; “we contemplate for the most
 part young men who don’t care for anything they ought to care for.”
 “well,” said philip, looking humble, “i care for some things, you and ruth
 for instance; perhaps i ought not to. perhaps i ought to care for congress
 and that sort of thing.”
 “don’t be a goose, philip. i heard from ruth yesterday.”
 “can i see her letter?”
 “no, indeed. but i am afraid her hard work is telling on her, together
 with her anxiety about her father.”
 “do you think, alice,” asked philip with one of those selfish thoughts
 that are not seldom mixed with real love, “that ruth prefers her
 profession to—to marriage?”
 “philip,” exclaimed alice, rising to quit the room, and speaking hurriedly
 as if the words were forced from her, “you are as blind as a bat; ruth
 would cut off her right hand for you this minute.”
 philip never noticed that alice’s face was flushed and that her voice was
 unsteady; he only thought of the delicious words he had heard. and the
 poor girl, loyal to ruth, loyal to philip, went straight to her room,
 locked the door, threw herself on the bed and sobbed as if her heart would
 break. and then she prayed that her father in heaven would give her
 strength. and after a time she was calm again, and went to her bureau
 drawer and took from a hiding place a little piece of paper, yellow with
 age. upon it was pinned a four-leaved clover, dry and yellow also. she
 looked long at this foolish memento. under the clover leaf was written in
 a school-girl’s hand—“philip, june, -.”
 squire montague thought very well of philip’s proposal. it would have been
 better if he had begun the study of the law as soon as he left college,
 but it was not too late now, and besides he had gathered some knowledge of
 the world.
 “but,” asked the squire, “do you mean to abandon your land in
 pennsylvania?” this track of land seemed an immense possible fortune to
 this new england lawyer-farmer. “hasn’t it good timber, and doesn’t the
 railroad almost touch it?”
 “i can’t do anything with it now. perhaps i can sometime.”
 “what is your reason for supposing that there is coal there?”
 “the opinion of the best geologist i could consult, my own observation of
 the country, and the little veins of it we found. i feel certain it is
 there. i shall find it some day. i know it. if i can only keep the land
 till i make money enough to try again.”
 philip took from his pocket a map of the anthracite coal region, and
 pointed out the position of the ilium mountain which he had begun to
 tunnel.
 “doesn’t it look like it?”
 “it certainly does,” said the squire, very much interested. it is not
 unusual for a quiet country gentleman to be more taken with such a venture
 than a speculator who, has had more experience in its uncertainty. it was
 astonishing how many new england clergymen, in the time of the petroleum
 excitement, took chances in oil. the wall street brokers are said to do a
 good deal of small business for country clergymen, who are moved no doubt
 with the laudable desire of purifying the new york stock board.
 “i don’t see that there is much risk,” said the squire, at length. “the
 timber is worth more than the mortgage; and if that coal seam does run
 there, it’s a magnificent fortune. would you like to try it again in the
 spring, phil?”
 like to try it! if he could have a little help, he would work himself,
 with pick and barrow, and live on a crust. only give him one more chance.
 and this is how it came about that the cautious old squire montague was
 drawn into this young fellow’s speculation, and began to have his serene
 old age disturbed by anxieties and by the hope of a great stroke of luck.
 “to be sure, i only care about it for the boy,” he said. the squire was
 like everybody else; sooner or later he must “take a chance.”
 it is probably on account of the lack of enterprise in women that they are
 not so fond of stock speculations and mine ventures as men. it is only
 when woman becomes demoralized that she takes to any sort of gambling.
 neither alice nor ruth were much elated with the prospect of philip’s
 renewal of his mining enterprise.
 but philip was exultant. he wrote to ruth as if his fortune were already
 made, and as if the clouds that lowered over the house of bolton were
 already in the deep bosom of a coal mine buried. towards spring he went to
 philadelphia with his plans all matured for a new campaign. his enthusiasm
 was irresistible.
 “philip has come, philip has come,” cried the children, as if some great
 good had again come into the household; and the refrain even sang itself
 over in ruth’s heart as she went the weary hospital rounds. mr. bolton
 felt more courage than he had had in months, at the sight of his manly
 face and the sound of his cheery voice.
 ruth’s course was vindicated now, and it certainly did not become philip,
 who had nothing to offer but a future chance against the visible result of
 her determination and industry, to open an argument with her. ruth was
 never more certain that she was right and that she was sufficient unto
 herself. she, may be, did not much heed the still small voice that sang in
 her maiden heart as she went about her work, and which lightened it and
 made it easy, “philip has come.”
 “i am glad for father’s sake,” she said to philip, “that thee has come. i
 can see that he depends greatly upon what thee can do. he thinks women
 won’t hold out long,” added ruth with the smile that philip never exactly
 understood.
 “and aren’t you tired sometimes of the struggle?”
 “tired? yes, everybody is tired i suppose. but it is a glorious
 profession. and would you want me to be dependent, philip?”
 “well, yes, a little,” said philip, feeling his way towards what he wanted
 to say.
 “on what, for instance, just now?” asked ruth, a little maliciously philip
 thought.
 “why, on—” he couldn’t quite say it, for it occurred to him that he
 was a poor stick for any body to lean on in the present state of his
 fortune, and that the woman before him was at least as independent as he
 was.
 “i don’t mean depend,” he began again. “but i love you, that’s all. am i
 nothing—to you?” and philip looked a little defiant, and as if he
 had said something that ought to brush away all the sophistries of
 obligation on either side, between man and woman.
 perhaps ruth saw this. perhaps she saw that her own theories of a certain
 equality of power, which ought to precede a union of two hearts, might be
 pushed too far. perhaps she had felt sometimes her own weakness and the
 need after all of so dear a sympathy and so tender an interest confessed,
 as that which philip could give. whatever moved her—the riddle is as
 old as creation—she simply looked up to philip and said in a low
 voice, “everything.”
 and philip clasping both her hands in his, and looking down into her eyes,
 which drank in all his tenderness with the thirst of a true woman’s nature—
 “oh! philip, come out here,” shouted young eli, throwing the door wide
 open.
 and ruth escaped away to her room, her heart singing again, and now as if
 it would burst for joy, “philip has come.”
 that night philip received a dispatch from harry—“the trial begins
 tomorrow.”
 december —, found washington hawkins and col. sellers once more at
 the capitol of the nation, standing guard over the university bill. the
 former gentleman was despondent, the latter hopeful. washington’s distress
 of mind was chiefly on laura’s account. the court would soon sit to try
 her case, he said, and consequently a great deal of ready money would be
 needed in the engineering of it. the university bill was sure to pass this
 time, and that would make money plenty, but might not the help come too
 late? congress had only just assembled, and delays were to be feared.
 “well,” said the colonel, “i don’t know but you are more or less right,
 there. now let’s figure up a little on, the preliminaries. i think
 congress always tries to do as near right as it can, according to its
 lights. a man can’t ask any fairer than that. the first preliminary it
 always starts out on, is to clean itself, so to speak. it will arraign two
 or three dozen of its members, or maybe four or five dozen, for taking
 bribes to vote for this and that and the other bill last winter.”
 “it goes up into the dozens, does it?”
 “well, yes; in a free country likes ours, where any man can run for
 congress and anybody can vote for him, you can’t expect immortal purity
 all the time—it ain’t in nature. sixty or eighty or a hundred and
 fifty people are bound to get in who are not angels in disguise, as young
 hicks the correspondent says; but still it is a very good average; very
 good indeed. as long as it averages as well as that, i think we can feel
 very well satisfied. even in these days, when people growl so much and the
 newspapers are so out of patience, there is still a very respectable
 minority of honest men in congress.”
 “why a respectable minority of honest men can’t do any good, colonel.”
 “oh, yes it can, too”
 “why, how?”
 “oh, in many ways, many ways.”
 “but what are the ways?”
 “well—i don’t know—it is a question that requires time; a body
 can’t answer every question right off-hand. but it does do good. i am
 satisfied of that.”
 “all right, then; grant that it does good; go on with the preliminaries.”
 “that is what i am coming to. first, as i said, they will try a lot of
 members for taking money for votes. that will take four weeks.”
 “yes, that’s like last year; and it is a sheer waste of the time for which
 the nation pays those men to work—that is what that is. and it
 pinches when a body’s got a bill waiting.”
 “a waste of time, to purify the fountain of public law? well, i never
 heard anybody express an idea like that before. but if it were, it would
 still be the fault of the minority, for the majority don’t institute these
 proceedings. there is where that minority becomes an obstruction—but
 still one can’t say it is on the wrong side.—well, after they have
 finished the bribery cases, they will take up cases of members who have
 bought their seats with money. that will take another four weeks.”
 “very good; go on. you have accounted for two-thirds of the session.”
 “next they will try each other for various smaller irregularities, like
 the sale of appointments to west point cadetships, and that sort of thing—mere
 trifling pocket-money enterprises that might better be passed over in
 silence, perhaps, but then one of our congresses can never rest easy till
 it has thoroughly purified itself of all blemishes—and that is a
 thing to be applauded.”
 “how long does it take to disinfect itself of these minor impurities?”
 “well, about two weeks, generally.”
 “so congress always lies helpless in quarantine ten weeks of a session.
 that’s encouraging. colonel, poor laura will never get any benefit from
 our bill. her trial will be over before congress has half purified itself.—and
 doesn’t it occur to you that by the time it has expelled all its impure
 members there may not be enough members left to do business legally?”
 “why i did not say congress would expel anybody.”
 “well won’t it expel anybody?”
 “not necessarily. did it last year? it never does. that would not be
 regular.”
 “then why waste all the session in that tomfoolery of trying members?”
 “it is usual; it is customary; the country requires it.”
 “then the country is a fool, i think.”
 “oh, no. the country thinks somebody is going to be expelled.”
 “well, when nobody is expelled, what does the country think then?”
 “by that time, the thing has strung out so long that the country is sick
 and tired of it and glad to have a change on any terms. but all that
 inquiry is not lost. it has a good moral effect.”
 “who does it have a good moral effect on?”
 “well—i don’t know. on foreign countries, i think. we have always
 been under the gaze of foreign countries. there is no country in the
 world, sir, that pursues corruption as inveterately as we do. there is no
 country in the world whose representatives try each other as much as ours
 do, or stick to it as long on a stretch. i think there is something great
 in being a model for the whole civilized world, washington.”
 “you don’t mean a model; you mean an example.”
 “well, it’s all the same; it’s just the same thing. it shows that a man
 can’t be corrupt in this country without sweating for it, i can tell you
 that.”
 “hang it, colonel, you just said we never punish anybody for villainous
 practices.”
 “but good god we try them, don’t we! is it nothing to show a disposition
 to sift things and bring people to a strict account? i tell you it has its
 effect.”
 “oh, bother the effect!—what is it they do do? how do they proceed?
 you know perfectly well—and it is all bosh, too. come, now, how do
 they proceed?”
 “why they proceed right and regular—and it ain’t bosh, washington,
 it ain’t bosh. they appoint a committee to investigate, and that committee
 hears evidence three weeks, and all the witnesses on one side swear that
 the accused took money or stock or something for his vote. then the
 accused stands up and testifies that he may have done it, but he was
 receiving and handling a good deal of money at the time and he doesn’t
 remember this particular circumstance—at least with sufficient
 distinctness to enable him to grasp it tangibly. so of course the thing is
 not proven—and that is what they say in the verdict. they don’t
 acquit, they don’t condemn. they just say, ‘charge not proven.’ it leaves
 the accused in a kind of a shaky condition before the country, it purifies
 congress, it satisfies everybody, and it doesn’t seriously hurt anybody.
 it has taken a long time to perfect our system, but it is the most
 admirable in the world, now.”
 “so one of those long stupid investigations always turns out in that lame
 silly way. yes, you are correct. i thought maybe you viewed the matter
 differently from other people. do you think a congress of ours could
 convict the devil of anything if he were a member?”
 “my dear boy, don’t let these damaging delays prejudice you against
 congress. don’t use such strong language; you talk like a newspaper.
 congress has inflicted frightful punishments on its members—now you
 know that. when they tried mr. fairoaks, and a cloud of witnesses proved
 him to be—well, you know what they proved him to be—and his
 own testimony and his own confessions gave him the same character, what
 did congress do then?—come!”
 “well, what did congress do?”
 “you know what congress did, washington. congress intimated plainly
 enough, that they considered him almost a stain upon their body; and
 without waiting ten days, hardly, to think the thing over, they rose up
 and hurled at him a resolution declaring that they disapproved of his
 conduct! now you know that, washington.”
 “it was a terrific thing—there is no denying that. if he had been
 proven guilty of theft, arson, licentiousness, infanticide, and defiling
 graves, i believe they would have suspended him for two days.”
 “you can depend on it, washington. congress is vindictive, congress is
 savage, sir, when it gets waked up once. it will go to any length to
 vindicate its honor at such a time.”
 “ah well, we have talked the morning through, just as usual in these
 tiresome days of waiting, and we have reached the same old result; that is
 to say, we are no better off than when we began. the land bill is just as
 far away as ever, and the trial is closer at hand. let’s give up
 everything and die.”
 “die and leave the duchess to fight it out all alone? oh, no, that won’t
 do. come, now, don’t talk so. it is all going to come out right. now
 you’ll see.”
 “it never will, colonel, never in the world. something tells me that. i
 get more tired and more despondent every day. i don’t see any hope; life
 is only just a trouble. i am so miserable, these days!”
 the colonel made washington get up and walk the floor with him, arm in
 arm. the good old speculator wanted to comfort him, but he hardly knew how
 to go about it. he made many attempts, but they were lame; they lacked
 spirit; the words were encouraging; but they were only words—he
 could not get any heart into them. he could not always warm up, now, with
 the old hawkeye fervor. by and by his lips trembled and his voice got
 unsteady. he said:
 “don’t give up the ship, my boy—don’t do it. the wind’s bound to
 fetch around and set in our favor. i know it.”
 and the prospect was so cheerful that he wept. then he blew a
 trumpet-blast that started the meshes of his handkerchief, and said in
 almost his breezy old-time way:
 “lord bless us, this is all nonsense! night doesn’t last always; day has
 got to break some time or other. every silver lining has a cloud behind
 it, as the poet says; and that remark has always cheered me; though—i
 never could see any meaning to it. everybody uses it, though, and
 everybody gets comfort out of it. i wish they would start something fresh.
 come, now, let’s cheer up; there’s been as good fish in the sea as there
 are now. it shall never be said that beriah sellers— come in?”
 it was the telegraph boy. the colonel reached for the message and devoured
 its contents:
 “i said it! never give up the ship! the trial’s postponed till february,
 and we’ll save the child yet. bless my life, what lawyers they have in
 new-york! give them money to fight with and the ghost of an excuse, and
 they: would manage to postpone anything in this world, unless it might be
 the millennium or something like that. now for work again my boy. the
 trial will last to the middle of march, sure; congress ends the fourth of
 march. within three days of the end of the session they will be done
 putting through the preliminaries then they will be ready for national
 business. our bill will go through in forty-eight hours, then, and we’ll
 telegraph a million dollars to the jury—to the lawyers, i mean—and
 the verdict of the jury will be ‘accidental murder resulting from
 justifiable insanity’—or something to, that effect, something to
 that effect.—everything is dead sure, now. come, what is the matter?
 what are you wilting down like that, for? you mustn’t be a girl, you
 know.”
 “oh, colonel, i am become so used to troubles, so used to failures,
 disappointments, hard luck of all kinds, that a little good news breaks me
 right down. everything has been so hopeless that now i can’t stand good
 news at all. it is too good to be true, anyway. don’t you see how our bad
 luck has worked on me? my hair is getting gray, and many nights i don’t
 sleep at all. i wish it was all over and we could rest. i wish we could
 lie down and just forget everything, and let it all be just a dream that
 is done and can’t come back to trouble us any more. i am so tired.”
 “ah, poor child, don’t talk like that-cheer up—there’s daylight
 ahead. don’t give up. you’ll have laura again, and—louise, and your
 mother, and oceans and oceans of money—and then you can go away,
 ever so far away somewhere, if you want to, and forget all about this
 infernal place. and by george i’ll go with you! i’ll go with you—now
 there’s my word on it. cheer up. i’ll run out and tell the friends the
 news.”
 and he wrung washington’s hand and was about to hurry away when his
 companion, in a burst of grateful admiration said:
 “i think you are the best soul and the noblest i ever knew, colonel
 sellers! and if the people only knew you as i do, you would not be tagging
 around here a nameless man—you would be in congress.”
 the gladness died out of the colonel’s face, and he laid his hand upon
 washington’s shoulder and said gravely:
 “i have always been a friend of your family, washington, and i think i
 have always tried to do right as between man and man, according to my
 lights. now i don’t think there has ever been anything in my conduct that
 should make you feel justified in saying a thing like that.”
 he turned, then, and walked slowly out, leaving washington abashed and
 somewhat bewildered. when washington had presently got his thoughts into
 line again, he said to himself, “why, honestly, i only meant to compliment
 him—indeed i would not have hurt him for the world.”
 the weeks drifted by monotonously enough, now. the “preliminaries”
 continued to drag along in congress, and life was a dull suspense to
 sellers and washington, a weary waiting which might have broken their
 hearts, maybe, but for the relieving change which they got out of an
 occasional visit to new york to see laura. standing guard in washington or
 anywhere else is not an exciting business in time of peace, but standing
 guard was all that the two friends had to do; all that was needed of them
 was that they should be on hand and ready for any emergency that might
 come up. there was no work to do; that was all finished; this was but the
 second session of the last winter’s congress, and its action on the bill
 could have but one result—its passage. the house must do its work
 over again, of course, but the same membership was there to see that it
 did it.—the senate was secure—senator dilworthy was able to
 put all doubts to rest on that head. indeed it was no secret in washington
 that a two-thirds vote in the senate was ready and waiting to be cast for
 the university bill as soon as it should come before that body.
 washington did not take part in the gaieties of “the season,” as he had
 done the previous winter. he had lost his interest in such things; he was
 oppressed with cares, now. senator dilworthy said to washington that an
 humble deportment, under punishment, was best, and that there was but one
 way in which the troubled heart might find perfect repose and peace. the
 suggestion found a response in washington’s breast, and the senator saw
 the sign of it in his face.
 from that moment one could find the youth with the senator even oftener
 than with col. sellers. when the statesman presided at great temperance
 meetings, he placed washington in the front rank of impressive dignitaries
 that gave tone to the occasion and pomp to the platform. his bald headed
 surroundings made the youth the more conspicuous.
 when the statesman made remarks in these meetings, he not infrequently
 alluded with effect to the encouraging spectacle of one of the wealthiest
 and most brilliant young favorites of society forsaking the light vanities
 of that butterfly existence to nobly and self-sacrificingly devote his
 talents and his riches to the cause of saving his hapless fellow creatures
 from shame and misery here and eternal regret hereafter.
 at the prayer meetings the senator always brought washington up the aisle
 on his arm and seated him prominently; in his prayers he referred to him
 in the cant terms which the senator employed, perhaps unconsciously, and
 mistook, maybe, for religion, and in other ways brought him into notice.
 he had him out at gatherings for the benefit of the negro, gatherings for
 the benefit of the indian, gatherings for the benefit of the heathen in
 distant lands. he had him out time and again, before sunday schools, as an
 example for emulation. upon all these occasions the senator made casual
 references to many benevolent enterprises which his ardent young friend
 was planning against the day when the passage of the university bill
 should make his means available for the amelioration of the condition of
 the unfortunate among his fellow men of all nations and all climes. thus
 as the weeks rolled on washington grew up into an imposing lion once more,
 but a lion that roamed the peaceful fields of religion and temperance, and
 revisited the glittering domain of fashion no more. a great moral
 influence was thus brought to bear in favor of the bill; the weightiest of
 friends flocked to its standard; its most energetic enemies said it was
 useless to fight longer; they had tacitly surrendered while as yet the day
 of battle was not come.
 the session was drawing toward its close. senator dilworthy thought he
 would run out west and shake hands with his constituents and let them look
 at him. the legislature whose duty it would be to re-elect him to the
 united states senate, was already in session. mr. dilworthy considered his
 re-election certain, but he was a careful, painstaking man, and if, by
 visiting his state he could find the opportunity to persuade a few more
 legislators to vote for him, he held the journey to be well worth taking.
 the university bill was safe, now; he could leave it without fear; it
 needed his presence and his watching no longer. but there was a person in
 his state legislature who did need watching—a person who, senator
 dilworthy said, was a narrow, grumbling, uncomfortable malcontent—a
 person who was stolidly opposed to reform, and progress and him,—a
 person who, he feared, had been bought with money to combat him, and
 through him the commonwealth’s welfare and its politics’ purity.
 “if this person noble,” said mr. dilworthy, in a little speech at a dinner
 party given him by some of his admirers, “merely desired to sacrifice me.—i
 would willingly offer up my political life on the altar of my dear state’s
 weal, i would be glad and grateful to do it; but when he makes of me but a
 cloak to hide his deeper designs, when he proposes to strike through me at
 the heart of my beloved state, all the lion in me is roused—and i
 say, here i stand, solitary and alone, but unflinching, unquailing, thrice
 armed with my sacred trust; and whoso passes, to do evil to this fair
 domain that looks to me for protection, must do so over my dead body.”
 he further said that if this noble were a pure man, and merely misguided,
 he could bear it, but that he should succeed in his wicked designs through
 a base use of money would leave a blot upon his state which would work
 untold evil to the morals of the people, and that he would not suffer; the
 public morals must not be contaminated. he would seek this man noble; he
 would argue, he would persuade, he would appeal to his honor.
 when he arrived on the ground he found his friends unterrified; they were
 standing firmly by him and were full of courage. noble was working hard,
 too, but matters were against him, he was not making much progress. mr.
 dilworthy took an early opportunity to send for mr. noble; he had a
 midnight interview with him, and urged him to forsake his evil ways; he
 begged him to come again and again, which he did. he finally sent the man
 away at  o’clock one morning; and when he was gone, mr. dilworthy said to
 himself,
 “i feel a good deal relieved, now, a great deal relieved.”
 the senator now turned his attention to matters touching the souls of his
 people. he appeared in church; he took a leading part in prayer meetings;
 he met and encouraged the temperance societies; he graced the sewing
 circles of the ladies with his presence, and even took a needle now and
 then and made a stitch or two upon a calico shirt for some poor bibleless
 pagan of the south seas, and this act enchanted the ladies, who regarded
 the garments thus honored as in a manner sanctified. the senator wrought
 in bible classes, and nothing could keep him away from the sunday schools—neither
 sickness nor storms nor weariness. he even traveled a tedious thirty miles
 in a poor little rickety stagecoach to comply with the desire of the
 miserable hamlet of cattleville that he would let its sunday school look
 upon him.
 all the town was assembled at the stage office when he arrived, two
 bonfires were burning, and a battery of anvils was popping exultant
 broadsides; for a united states senator was a sort of god in the
 understanding of these people who never had seen any creature mightier
 than a county judge. to them a united states senator was a vast, vague
 colossus, an awe inspiring unreality.
 next day everybody was at the village church a full half hour before time
 for sunday school to open; ranchmen and farmers had come with their
 families from five miles around, all eager to get a glimpse of the great
 man—the man who had been to washington; the man who had seen the
 president of the united states, and had even talked with him; the man who
 had seen the actual washington monument—perhaps touched it with his
 hands.
 when the senator arrived the church was crowded, the windows were full,
 the aisles were packed, so was the vestibule, and so indeed was the yard
 in front of the building. as he worked his way through to the pulpit on
 the arm of the minister and followed by the envied officials of the
 village, every neck was stretched and, every eye twisted around
 intervening obstructions to get a glimpse. elderly people directed each
 other’s attention and, said, “there! that’s him, with the grand, noble
 forehead!” boys nudged each other and said, “hi, johnny, here he is,
 there, that’s him, with the peeled head!”
 the senator took his seat in the pulpit, with the minister on one side of
 him and the superintendent of the sunday school on the other. the town
 dignitaries sat in an impressive row within the altar railings below. the
 sunday school children occupied ten of the front benches dressed in their
 best and most uncomfortable clothes, and with hair combed and faces too
 clean to feel natural. so awed were they by the presence of a living
 united states senator, that during three minutes not a “spit ball” was
 thrown. after that they began to come to themselves by degrees, and
 presently the spell was wholly gone and they were reciting verses and
 pulling hair.
 the usual sunday school exercises were hurried through, and then the
 minister, got up and bored the house with a speech built on the customary
 sunday school plan; then the superintendent put in his oar; then the town
 dignitaries had their say. they all made complimentary reference to “their
 friend the senator,” and told what a great and illustrious man he was and
 what he had done for his country and for religion and temperance, and
 exhorted the little boys to be good and diligent and try to become like
 him some day. the speakers won the deathless hatred of the house by these
 delays, but at last there was an end and hope revived; inspiration was
 about to find utterance.
 senator dilworthy rose and beamed upon the assemblage for a full minute in
 silence. then he smiled with an access of sweetness upon the children and
 began:
 “my little friends—for i hope that all these bright-faced little
 people are my friends and will let me be their friend—my little
 friends, i have traveled much, i have been in many cities and many states,
 everywhere in our great and noble country, and by the blessing of
 providence i have been permitted to see many gatherings like this—but
 i am proud, i am truly proud to say that i never have looked upon so much
 intelligence, so much grace, such sweetness of disposition as i see in the
 charming young countenances i see before me at this moment. i have been
 asking myself as i sat here, where am i? am i in some far-off monarchy,
 looking upon little princes and princesses? no. am i in some populous
 centre of my own country, where the choicest children of the land have
 been selected and brought together as at a fair for a prize? no. am i in
 some strange foreign clime where the children are marvels that we know not
 of? no. then where am i? yes—where am i? i am in a simple, remote,
 unpretending settlement of my own dear state, and these are the children
 of the noble and virtuous men who have made me what i am! my soul is lost
 in wonder at the thought! and i humbly thank him to whom we are but as
 worms of the dust, that he has been pleased to call me to serve such men!
 earth has no higher, no grander position for me. let kings and emperors
 keep their tinsel crowns, i want them not; my heart is here!
 “again i thought, is this a theatre? no. is it a concert or a gilded
 opera? no. is it some other vain, brilliant, beautiful temple of
 soul-staining amusement and hilarity? no. then what is it? what did my
 consciousness reply? i ask you, my little friends, what did my
 consciousness reply? it replied, it is the temple of the lord! ah, think
 of that, now. i could hardly keep the tears back, i was so grateful. oh,
 how beautiful it is to see these ranks of sunny little faces assembled
 here to learn the way of life; to learn to be good; to learn to be useful;
 to learn to be pious; to learn to be great and glorious men and women; to
 learn to be props and pillars of the state and shining lights in the
 councils and the households of the nation; to be bearers of the banner and
 soldiers of the cross in the rude campaigns of life, and raptured souls in
 the happy fields of paradise hereafter.
 “children, honor your parents and be grateful to them for providing for
 you the precious privileges of a sunday school.
 “now my dear little friends, sit up straight and pretty—there,
 that’s it—and give me your attention and let me tell you about a
 poor little sunday school scholar i once knew.—he lived in the far
 west, and his parents were poor. they could not give him a costly
 education; but they were good and wise and they sent him to the sunday
 school. he loved the sunday school. i hope you love your sunday school—ah,
 i see by your faces that you do! that is right!
 “well, this poor little boy was always in his place when the bell rang,
 and he always knew his lesson; for his teachers wanted him to learn and he
 loved his teachers dearly. always love your teachers, my children, for
 they love you more than you can know, now. he would not let bad boys
 persuade him to go to play on sunday. there was one little bad boy who was
 always trying to persuade him, but he never could.
 “so this poor little boy grew up to be a man, and had to go out in the
 world, far from home and friends to earn his living. temptations lay all
 about him, and sometimes he was about to yield, but he would think of some
 precious lesson he learned in his sunday school a long time ago, and that
 would save him. by and by he was elected to the legislature—then he
 did everything he could for sunday schools. he got laws passed for them;
 he got sunday schools established wherever he could.
 “and by and by the people made him governor—and he said it was all
 owing to the sunday school.
 “after a while the people elected him a representative to the congress of
 the united states, and he grew very famous.—now temptations assailed
 him on every hand. people tried to get him to drink wine; to dance, to go
 to theatres; they even tried to buy his vote; but no, the memory of his
 sunday school saved him from all harm; he remembered the fate of the bad
 little boy who used to try to get him to play on sunday, and who grew up
 and became a drunkard and was hanged. he remembered that, and was glad he
 never yielded and played on sunday.
 “well, at last, what do you think happened? why the people gave him a
 towering, illustrious position, a grand, imposing position. and what do
 you think it was? what should you say it was, children? it was senator of
 the united states! that poor little boy that loved his sunday school
 became that man. that man stands before you! all that he is, he owes to
 the sunday school.
 “my precious children, love your parents, love your teachers, love your
 sunday school, be pious, be obedient, be honest, be diligent, and then you
 will succeed in life and be honored of all men. above all things, my
 children, be honest. above all things be pure-minded as the snow. let us
 join in prayer.”
 when senator dilworthy departed from cattleville, he left three dozen boys
 behind him arranging a campaign of life whose objective point was the
 united states senate.
 when he arrived at the state capital at midnight mr. noble came and held a
 three-hours’ conference with him, and then as he was about leaving said:
 “i’ve worked hard, and i’ve got them at last. six of them haven’t got
 quite back-bone enough to slew around and come right out for you on the
 first ballot to-morrow; but they’re going to vote against you on the first
 for the sake of appearances, and then come out for you all in a body on
 the second—i’ve fixed all that! by supper time to-morrow you’ll be
 re-elected. you can go to bed and sleep easy on that.”
 after mr. noble was gone, the senator said:
 “well, to bring about a complexion of things like this was worth coming
 west for.”
 the case of the state of new york against laura hawkins was finally set
 down for trial on the th day of february, less than a year after the
 shooting of george selby.
 if the public had almost forgotten the existence of laura and her crime,
 they were reminded of all the details of the murder by the newspapers,
 which for some days had been announcing the approaching trial. but they
 had not forgotten. the sex, the age, the beauty of the prisoner; her high
 social position in washington, the unparalled calmness with which the
 crime was committed had all conspired to fix the event in the public mind,
 although nearly three hundred and sixty-five subsequent murders had
 occurred to vary the monotony of metropolitan life.
 no, the public read from time to time of the lovely prisoner, languishing
 in the city prison, the tortured victim of the law’s delay; and as the
 months went by it was natural that the horror of her crime should become a
 little indistinct in memory, while the heroine of it should be invested
 with a sort of sentimental interest. perhaps her counsel had calculated on
 this. perhaps it was by their advice that laura had interested herself in
 the unfortunate criminals who shared her prison confinement, and had done
 not a little to relieve, from her own purse, the necessities of some of
 the poor creatures. that she had done this, the public read in the
 journals of the day, and the simple announcement cast a softening light
 upon her character.
 the court room was crowded at an early hour, before the arrival of judges,
 lawyers and prisoner. there is no enjoyment so keen to certain minds as
 that of looking upon the slow torture of a human being on trial for life,
 except it be an execution; there is no display of human ingenuity, wit and
 power so fascinating as that made by trained lawyers in the trial of an
 important case, nowhere else is exhibited such subtlety, acumen, address,
 eloquence.
 all the conditions of intense excitement meet in a murder trial. the awful
 issue at stake gives significance to the lightest word or look. how the
 quick eyes of the spectators rove from the stolid jury to the keen
 lawyers, the impassive judge, the anxious prisoner. nothing is lost of the
 sharp wrangle of the counsel on points of law, the measured decision’s of
 the bench; the duels between the attorneys and the witnesses. the crowd
 sways with the rise and fall of the shifting testimony, in sympathetic
 interest, and hangs upon the dicta of the judge in breathless silence. it
 speedily takes sides for or against the accused, and recognizes as quickly
 its favorites among the lawyers. nothing delights it more than the sharp
 retort of a witness and the discomfiture of an obnoxious attorney. a joke,
 even if it be a lame one, is no where so keenly relished or quickly
 applauded as in a murder trial.
 within the bar the young lawyers and the privileged hangers-on filled all
 the chairs except those reserved at the table for those engaged in the
 case. without, the throng occupied all the seats, the window ledges and
 the standing room. the atmosphere was already something horrible. it was
 the peculiar odor of a criminal court, as if it were tainted by the
 presence, in different persons, of all the crimes that men and women can
 commit.
 there was a little stir when the prosecuting attorney, with two
 assistants, made his way in, seated himself at the table, and spread his
 papers before him. there was more stir when the counsel of the defense
 appeared. they were mr. braham, the senior, and mr. quiggle and mr.
 o’keefe, the juniors.
 everybody in the court room knew mr. braham, the great criminal lawyer,
 and he was not unaware that he was the object of all eyes as he moved to
 his place, bowing to his friends in the bar. a large but rather spare man,
 with broad shoulders and a massive head, covered with chestnut curls which
 fell down upon his coat collar and which he had a habit of shaking as a
 lion is supposed to shake his mane. his face was clean shaven, and he had
 a wide mouth and rather small dark eyes, set quite too near together. mr.
 braham wore a brown frock coat buttoned across his breast, with a rose-bud
 in the upper buttonhole, and light pantaloons. a diamond stud was seen to
 flash from his bosom; and as he seated himself and drew off his gloves a
 heavy seal ring was displayed upon his white left hand. mr. braham having
 seated himself, deliberately surveyed the entire house, made a remark to
 one of his assistants, and then taking an ivory-handled knife from his
 pocket began to pare his finger nails, rocking his chair backwards and
 forwards slowly.
 a moment later judge o’shaunnessy entered at the rear door and took his
 seat in one of the chairs behind the bench; a gentleman in black
 broadcloth, with sandy hair, inclined to curl, a round, reddish and rather
 jovial face, sharp rather than intellectual, and with a self-sufficient
 air. his career had nothing remarkable in it. he was descended from a long
 line of irish kings, and he was the first one of them who had ever come
 into his kingdom—the kingdom of such being the city of new york. he
 had, in fact, descended so far and so low that he found himself, when a
 boy, a sort of street arab in that city; but he had ambition and native
 shrewdness, and he speedily took to boot-polishing, and newspaper hawking,
 became the office and errand boy of a law firm, picked up knowledge enough
 to get some employment in police courts, was admitted to the bar, became a
 rising young politician, went to the legislature, and was finally elected
 to the bench which he now honored. in this democratic country he was
 obliged to conceal his royalty under a plebeian aspect. judge o’shaunnessy
 never had a lucrative practice nor a large salary but he had prudently
 laid away money—believing that a dependant judge can never be
 impartial—and he had lands and houses to the value of three or four
 hundred thousand dollars. had he not helped to build and furnish this very
 court house? did he not know that the very “spittoon” which his judgeship
 used cost the city the sum of one thousand dollars?
 as soon as the judge was seated, the court was opened with the “oi yis, oi
 yis” of the officer in his native language, the case called, and the
 sheriff was directed to bring in the prisoner. in the midst of a profound
 hush laura entered, leaning on the arm of the officer, and was conducted
 to a seat by her counsel. she was followed by her mother and by washington
 hawkins, who were given seats near her.
 laura was very pale, but this pallor heightened the lustre of her large
 eyes and gave a touching sadness to her expressive face. she was dressed
 in simple black, with exquisite taste, and without an ornament. the thin
 lace vail which partially covered her face did not so much conceal as
 heighten her beauty. she would not have entered a drawing room with more
 self-poise, nor a church with more haughty humility. there was in her
 manner or face neither shame nor boldness, and when she took her seat in
 full view of half the spectators, her eyes were downcast. a murmur of
 admiration ran through the room. the newspaper reporters made their
 pencils fly. mr. braham again swept his eyes over the house as if in
 approval. when laura at length raised her eyes a little, she saw philip
 and harry within the bar, but she gave no token of recognition.
 the clerk then read the indictment, which was in the usual form. it
 charged laura hawkins, in effect, with the premeditated murder of george
 selby, by shooting him with a pistol, with a revolver, shotgun, rifle,
 repeater, breech-loader, cannon, six-shooter, with a gun, or some other
 weapon; with killing him with a slung-shot, a bludgeon, carving knife,
 bowie knife, pen knife, rolling pin, car, hook, dagger, hair pin, with a
 hammer, with a screw-driver, with a nail, and with all other weapons and
 utensils whatsoever, at the southern hotel and in all other hotels and
 places wheresoever, on the thirteenth day of march and all other days of
 the christian era wheresoever.
 laura stood while the long indictment was read; and at the end, in
 response to the inquiry, of the judge, she said in a clear, low voice;
 “not guilty.” she sat down and the court proceeded to impanel a jury.
 the first man called was michael lanigan, saloon keeper.
 “have you formed or expressed any opinion on this case, and do you know
 any of the parties?”
 “not any,” said mr. lanigan.
 “have you any conscientious objections to capital punishment?”
 “no, sir, not to my knowledge.”
 “have you read anything about this case?”
 “to be sure, i read the papers, y’r honor.”
 objected to by mr. braham, for cause, and discharged.
 patrick coughlin.
 “what is your business?”
 “well—i haven’t got any particular business.”
 “haven’t any particular business, eh? well, what’s your general business?
 what do you do for a living?”
 “i own some terriers, sir.”
 “own some terriers, eh? keep a rat pit?”
 “gentlemen comes there to have a little sport. i never fit ’em, sir.”
 “oh, i see—you are probably the amusement committee of the city
 council. have you ever heard of this case?”
 “not till this morning, sir.”
 “can you read?”
 “not fine print, y’r honor.”
 the man was about to be sworn, when mr. braham asked,
 “could your father read?”
 “the old gentleman was mighty handy at that, sir.”
 mr. braham submitted that the man was disqualified. judge thought not.
 point argued. challenged peremptorily, and set aside.
 ethan dobb, cart-driver.
 “can you read?”
 “yes, but haven’t a habit of it.”
 “have you heard of this case?”
 “i think so—but it might be another. i have no opinion about it.”
 dist. a. “tha—tha—there! hold on a bit? did anybody tell you
 to say you had no opinion about it?”
 “n—n—o, sir.”
 “take care now, take care. then what suggested it to you to volunteer that
 remark?”
 “they’ve always asked that, when i was on juries.”
 “all right, then. have you any conscientious scruples about capital
 punishment?”
 “any which?”
 “would you object to finding a person guilty—of murder on evidence?”
 “i might, sir, if i thought he wan’t guilty.”
 the district attorney thought he saw a point.
 “would this feeling rather incline you against a capital conviction?”
 the juror said he hadn’t any feeling, and didn’t know any of the parties.
 accepted and sworn.
 dennis lafin, laborer. have neither formed nor expressed an opinion. never
 had heard of the case. believed in hangin’ for them that deserved it.
 could read if it was necessary.
 mr. braham objected. the man was evidently bloody minded. challenged
 peremptorily.
 larry o’toole, contractor. a showily dressed man of the style known as
 “vulgar genteel,” had a sharp eye and a ready tongue. had read the
 newspaper reports of the case, but they made no impression on him. should
 be governed by the evidence. knew no reason why he could not be an
 impartial juror.
 question by district attorney.
 “how is it that the reports made no impression on you?”
 “never believe anything i see in the newspapers.”
 (laughter from the crowd, approving smiles from his honor and mr. braham.)
 juror sworn in. mr. braham whispered to o’keefe, “that’s the man.”
 avery hicks, pea-nut peddler. did he ever hear of this case? the man shook
 his head.
 “can you read?”
 “no.” “any scruples about capital punishment?”
 “no.”
 he was about to be sworn, when the district attorney turning to him
 carelessly, remarked,
 “understand the nature of an oath?”
 “outside,” said the man, pointing to the door.
 “i say, do you know what an oath is?”
 “five cents,” explained the man.
 “do you mean to insult me?” roared the prosecuting officer. “are you an
 idiot?”
 “fresh baked. i’m deefe. i don’t hear a word you say.”
 the man was discharged. “he wouldn’t have made a bad juror, though,”
 whispered braham. “i saw him looking at the prisoner sympathizingly.
 that’s a point you want to watch for.”
 the result of the whole day’s work was the selection of only two jurors.
 these however were satisfactory to mr. braham. he had kept off all those
 he did not know. no one knew better than this great criminal lawyer that
 the battle was fought on the selection of the jury. the subsequent
 examination of witnesses, the eloquence expended on the jury are all for
 effect outside. at least that is the theory of mr. braham. but human
 nature is a queer thing, he admits; sometimes jurors are unaccountably
 swayed, be as careful as you can in choosing them.
 it was four weary days before this jury was made up, but when it was
 finally complete, it did great credit to the counsel for the defence. so
 far as mr. braham knew, only two could read, one of whom was the foreman,
 mr. braham’s friend, the showy contractor. low foreheads and heavy faces
 they all had; some had a look of animal cunning, while the most were only
 stupid. the entire panel formed that boasted heritage commonly described
 as the “bulwark of our liberties.”
 the district attorney, mr. mcflinn, opened the case for the state. he
 spoke with only the slightest accent, one that had been inherited but not
 cultivated. he contented himself with a brief statement of the case. the
 state would prove that laura hawkins, the prisoner at the bar, a fiend in
 the form of a beautiful woman, shot dead george selby, a southern
 gentleman, at the time and place described. that the murder was in cold
 blood, deliberate and without provocation; that it had been long
 premeditated and threatened; that she had followed the deceased from
 washington to commit it. all this would be proved by unimpeachable
 witnesses. the attorney added that the duty of the jury, however painful
 it might be, would be plain and simple. they were citizens, husbands,
 perhaps fathers. they knew how insecure life had become in the metropolis.
 tomorrow our own wives might be widows, their own children orphans, like
 the bereaved family in yonder hotel, deprived of husband and father by the
 jealous hand of some murderous female. the attorney sat down, and the
 clerk called?
 “henry brierly.”
 henry brierly took the stand. requested by the district attorney to tell
 the jury all he knew about the killing, he narrated the circumstances
 substantially as the reader already knows them.
 he accompanied miss hawkins to new york at her request, supposing she was
 coming in relation to a bill then pending in congress, to secure the
 attendance of absent members. her note to him was here shown. she appeared
 to be very much excited at the washington station. after she had asked the
 conductor several questions, he heard her say, “he can’t escape.” witness
 asked her “who?” and she replied “nobody.” did not see her during the
 night. they traveled in a sleeping car. in the morning she appeared not to
 have slept, said she had a headache. in crossing the ferry she asked him
 about the shipping in sight; he pointed out where the cunarders lay when
 in port. they took a cup of coffee that morning at a restaurant. she said
 she was anxious to reach the southern hotel where mr. simons, one of the
 absent members, was staying, before he went out. she was entirely
 self-possessed, and beyond unusual excitement did not act unnaturally.
 after she had fired twice at col. selby, she turned the pistol towards her
 own breast, and witness snatched it from her. she had been a great deal
 with selby in washington, appeared to be infatuated with him.
 (cross-examined by mr. braham.) “mist-er.....er brierly!” (mr. braham had
 in perfection this lawyer’s trick of annoying a witness, by drawling out
 the “mister,” as if unable to recall the name, until the witness is
 sufficiently aggravated, and then suddenly, with a rising inflection,
 flinging his name at him with startling unexpectedness.) “mist-er.....er
 brierly! what is your occupation?”
 “civil engineer, sir.”
 “ah, civil engineer, (with a glance at the jury). following that
 occupation with miss hawkins?” (smiles by the jury).
 “no, sir,” said harry, reddening.
 “how long have you known the prisoner?”
 “two years, sir. i made her acquaintance in hawkeye, missouri.”
 “m.....m...m. mist-er.....er brierly! were you not a lover of miss
 hawkins?”
 objected to. “i submit, your honor, that i have the right to establish the
 relation of this unwilling witness to the prisoner.” admitted.
 “well, sir,” said harry hesitatingly, “we were friends.”
 “you act like a friend!” (sarcastically.) the jury were beginning to hate
 this neatly dressed young sprig. “mister......er....brierly! didn’t miss
 hawkins refuse you?”
 harry blushed and stammered and looked at the judge. “you must answer,
 sir,” said his honor.
 “she—she—didn’t accept me.”
 “no. i should think not. brierly do you dare tell the jury that you had
 not an interest in the removal of your rival, col. selby?” roared mr.
 braham in a voice of thunder.
 “nothing like this, sir, nothing like this,” protested the witness.
 “that’s all, sir,” said mr. braham severely.
 “one word,” said the district attorney. “had you the least suspicion of
 the prisoner’s intention, up to the moment of the shooting?”
 “not the least,” answered harry earnestly.
 “of course not, of course not,” nodded mr. braham to the jury.
 the prosecution then put upon the stand the other witnesses of the
 shooting at the hotel, and the clerk and the attending physicians. the
 fact of the homicide was clearly established. nothing new was elicited,
 except from the clerk, in reply to a question by mr. braham, the fact that
 when the prisoner enquired for col. selby she appeared excited and there
 was a wild look in her eyes.
 the dying deposition of col. selby was then produced. it set forth laura’s
 threats, but there was a significant addition to it, which the newspaper
 report did not have. it seemed that after the deposition was taken as
 reported, the colonel was told for the first time by his physicians that
 his wounds were mortal. he appeared to be in great mental agony and fear;
 and said he had not finished his deposition. he added, with great
 difficulty and long pauses these words. “i—have—not—told—all.
 i must tell—put—it—down—i—wronged—her.
 years—ago—i—can’t see—o—god—i—deserved——”
 that was all. he fainted and did not revive again.
 the washington railway conductor testified that the prisoner had asked him
 if a gentleman and his family went out on the evening train, describing
 the persons he had since learned were col. selby and family.
 susan cullum, colored servant at senator dilworthy’s, was sworn. knew col.
 selby. had seen him come to the house often, and be alone in the parlor
 with miss hawkins. he came the day but one before he was shot. she let him
 in. he appeared flustered like. she heard talking in the parlor, ’peared
 like it was quarrelin’. was afeared sumfin’ was wrong: just put her ear to—the—keyhole
 of the back parlor-door. heard a man’s voice, “i—can’t—i
 can’t, good god,” quite beggin’ like. heard—young miss’ voice, “take
 your choice, then. if you ’bandon me, you knows what to ’spect.” then he
 rushes outen the house, i goes in—and i says, “missis did you ring?”
 she was a standin’ like a tiger, her eyes flashin’. i come right out.
 this was the substance of susan’s testimony, which was not shaken in the
 least by severe cross-examination. in reply to mr. braham’s question, if
 the prisoner did not look insane, susan said, “lord; no, sir, just mad as
 a hawnet.”
 washington hawkins was sworn. the pistol, identified by the officer as the
 one used in the homicide, was produced washington admitted that it was
 his. she had asked him for it one morning, saying she thought she had
 heard burglars the night before. admitted that he never had heard burglars
 in the house. had anything unusual happened just before that? nothing that
 he remembered. did he accompany her to a reception at mrs. shoonmaker’s a
 day or two before? yes. what occurred? little by little it was dragged out
 of the witness that laura had behaved strangely there, appeared to be
 sick, and he had taken her home. upon being pushed he admitted that she
 had afterwards confessed that she saw selby there. and washington
 volunteered the statement that selby, was a black-hearted villain.
 the district attorney said, with some annoyance; “there—there! that
 will do.”
 the defence declined to examine mr. hawkins at present. the case for the
 prosecution was closed. of the murder there could not be the least doubt,
 or that the prisoner followed the deceased to new york with a murderous
 intent. on the evidence the jury must convict, and might do so without
 leaving their seats. this was the condition of the case two days after the
 jury had been selected. a week had passed since the trial opened; and a
 sunday had intervened.
 the public who read the reports of the evidence saw no chance for the
 prisoner’s escape. the crowd of spectators who had watched the trial were
 moved with the most profound sympathy for laura.
 mr. braham opened the case for the defence. his manner was subdued, and he
 spoke in so low a voice that it was only by reason of perfect silence in
 the court room that he could be heard. he spoke very distinctly, however,
 and if his nationality could be discovered in his speech it was only in a
 certain richness and breadth of tone.
 he began by saying that he trembled at the responsibility he had
 undertaken; and he should altogether despair, if he did not see before him
 a jury of twelve men of rare intelligence, whose acute minds would unravel
 all the sophistries of the prosecution, men with a sense of honor, which
 would revolt at the remorseless persecution of this hunted woman by the
 state, men with hearts to feel for the wrongs of which she was the victim.
 far be it from him to cast any suspicion upon the motives of the able,
 eloquent and ingenious lawyers of the state; they act officially; their
 business is to convict. it is our business, gentlemen, to see that justice
 is done.
 “it is my duty, gentlemen, to unfold to you one of the most affecting
 dramas in all the history of misfortune. i shall have to show you a life,
 the sport of fate and circumstances, hurried along through shifting storm
 and sun, bright with trusting innocence and anon black with heartless
 villainy, a career which moves on in love and desertion and anguish,
 always hovered over by the dark spectre of insanity—an insanity
 hereditary and induced by mental torture,—until it ends, if end it
 must in your verdict, by one of those fearful accidents, which are
 inscrutable to men and of which god alone knows the secret.
 “gentlemen, i shall ask you to go with me away from this court room and
 its minions of the law, away from the scene of this tragedy, to a distant,
 i wish i could say a happier day. the story i have to tell is of a lovely
 little girl, with sunny hair and laughing eyes, traveling with her
 parents, evidently people of wealth and refinement, upon a mississippi
 steamboat. there is an explosion, one of those terrible catastrophes which
 leave the imprint of an unsettled mind upon the survivors. hundreds of
 mangled remains are sent into eternity. when the wreck is cleared away
 this sweet little girl is found among the panic stricken survivors in the
 midst of a scene of horror enough to turn the steadiest brain. her parents
 have disappeared. search even for their bodies is in vain. the bewildered,
 stricken child—who can say what changes the fearful event wrought in
 her tender brain—clings to the first person who shows her sympathy.
 it is mrs. hawkins, this good lady who is still her loving friend. laura
 is adopted into the hawkins family. perhaps she forgets in time that she
 is not their child. she is an orphan. no, gentlemen, i will not deceive
 you, she is not an orphan. worse than that. there comes another day of
 agony. she knows that her father lives. who is he, where is he? alas, i
 cannot tell you. through the scenes of this painful history he flits here
 and there a lunatic! if he seeks his daughter, it is the purposeless
 search of a lunatic, as one who wanders bereft of reason, crying where is
 my child? laura seeks her father. in vain just as she is about to find
 him, again and again-he disappears, he is gone, he vanishes.
 “but this is only the prologue to the tragedy. bear with me while i relate
 it. (mr. braham takes out a handkerchief, unfolds it slowly; crashes it in
 his nervous hand, and throws it on the table). laura grew up in her humble
 southern home, a beautiful creature, the joy of the house, the pride of
 the neighborhood, the loveliest flower in all the sunny south. she might
 yet have been happy; she was happy. but the destroyer came into this
 paradise. he plucked the sweetest bud that grew there, and having enjoyed
 its odor, trampled it in the mire beneath his feet. george selby, the
 deceased, a handsome, accomplished confederate colonel, was this human
 fiend. he deceived her with a mock marriage; after some months he brutally
 abandoned her, and spurned her as if she were a contemptible thing; all
 the time he had a wife in new orleans. laura was crushed. for weeks, as i
 shall show you by the testimony of her adopted mother and brother, she
 hovered over death in delirium. gentlemen, did she ever emerge from this
 delirium? i shall show you that when she recovered her health, her mind
 was changed, she was not what she had been. you can judge yourselves
 whether the tottering reason ever recovered its throne.
 “years pass. she is in washington, apparently the happy favorite of a
 brilliant society. her family have become enormously rich by one of those
 sudden turns in fortune that the inhabitants of america are familiar with—the
 discovery of immense mineral wealth in some wild lands owned by them. she
 is engaged in a vast philanthropic scheme for the benefit of the poor, by
 the use of this wealth. but, alas, even here and now, the same relentless
 fate pursued her. the villain selby appears again upon the scene, as if on
 purpose to complete the ruin of her life. he appeared to taunt her with
 her dishonor, he threatened exposure if she did not become again the
 mistress of his passion. gentlemen, do you wonder if this woman, thus
 pursued, lost her reason, was beside herself with fear, and that her
 wrongs preyed upon her mind until she was no longer responsible for her
 acts? i turn away my head as one who would not willingly look even upon
 the just vengeance of heaven. (mr. braham paused as if overcome by his
 emotions. mrs. hawkins and washington were in tears, as were many of the
 spectators also. the jury looked scared.)
 “gentlemen, in this condition of affairs it needed but a spark—i do
 not say a suggestion, i do not say a hint—from this butterfly
 brierly; this rejected rival, to cause the explosion. i make no charges,
 but if this woman was in her right mind when she fled from washington and
 reached this city in company—with brierly, then i do not know what
 insanity is.”
 when mr. braham sat down, he felt that he had the jury with him. a burst
 of applause followed, which the officer promptly, suppressed. laura, with
 tears in her eyes, turned a grateful look upon her counsel. all the women
 among the spectators saw the tears and wept also. they thought as they
 also looked at mr. braham, how handsome he is!
 mrs. hawkins took the stand. she was somewhat confused to be the target of
 so many, eyes, but her honest and good face at once told in laura’s favor.
 “mrs. hawkins,” said mr. braham, “will you’ be kind enough to state the
 circumstances of your finding laura?”
 “i object,” said mr. mcflinn; rising to his feet. “this has nothing
 whatever to do with the case, your honor. i am surprised at it, even after
 the extraordinary speech of my learned friend.”
 “how do you propose to connect it, mr. braham?” asked the judge.
 “if it please the court,” said mr. braham, rising impressively, “your
 honor has permitted the prosecution, and i have submitted without a word,
 to go into the most extraordinary testimony to establish a motive. are we
 to be shut out from showing that the motive attributed to us could not by
 reason of certain mental conditions exist? i purpose, may, it please your
 honor, to show the cause and the origin of an aberration of mind, to
 follow it up, with other like evidence, connecting it with the very moment
 of the homicide, showing a condition of the intellect, of the prisoner
 that precludes responsibility.”
 “the state must insist upon its objections,” said the district attorney.
 “the purpose evidently is to open the door to a mass of irrelevant
 testimony, the object of which is to produce an effect upon the jury your
 honor well understands.”
 “perhaps,” suggested the judge, “the court ought to hear the testimony,
 and exclude it afterwards, if it is irrelevant.”
 “will your honor hear argument on that!”
 “certainly.”
 and argument his honor did hear, or pretend to, for two whole days, from
 all the counsel in turn, in the course of which the lawyers read
 contradictory decisions enough to perfectly establish both sides, from
 volume after volume, whole libraries in fact, until no mortal man could
 say what the rules were. the question of insanity in all its legal aspects
 was of course drawn into the discussion, and its application affirmed and
 denied. the case was felt to turn upon the admission or rejection of this
 evidence. it was a sort of test trial of strength between the lawyers. at
 the end the judge decided to admit the testimony, as the judge usually
 does in such cases, after a sufficient waste of time in what are called
 arguments.
 mrs. hawkins was allowed to go on.
 mrs. hawkins slowly and conscientiously, as if every detail of her family
 history was important, told the story of the steamboat explosion, of the
 finding and adoption of laura. silas, that is mr. hawkins, and she always
 loved laura, as if she had been their own child.
 she then narrated the circumstances of laura’s supposed marriage, her
 abandonment and long illness, in a manner that touched all hearts. laura
 had been a different woman since then.
 cross-examined. at the time of first finding laura on the steamboat, did
 she notice that laura’s mind was at all deranged? she couldn’t say that
 she did. after the recovery of laura from her long illness, did mrs.
 hawkins think there were any signs of insanity about her? witness
 confessed that she did not think of it then.
 re-direct examination. “but she was different after that?”
 “o, yes, sir.”
 washington hawkins corroborated his mother’s testimony as to laura’s
 connection with col. selby. he was at harding during the time of her
 living there with him. after col. selby’s desertion she was almost dead,
 never appeared to know anything rightly for weeks. he added that he never
 saw such a scoundrel as selby. (checked by district attorney.) had he
 noticed any change in laura after her illness? oh, yes. whenever, any
 allusion was made that might recall selby to mind, she looked awful—as
 if she could kill him.
 “you mean,” said mr. braham, “that there was an unnatural, insane gleam in
 her eyes?”
 “yes, certainly,” said washington in confusion.
 all this was objected to by the district attorney, but it was got before
 the jury, and mr. braham did not care how much it was ruled out after
 that.
 beriah sellers was the next witness called. the colonel made his way to
 the stand with majestic, yet bland deliberation. having taken the oath and
 kissed the bible with a smack intended to show his great respect for that
 book, he bowed to his honor with dignity, to the jury with familiarity,
 and then turned to the lawyers and stood in an attitude of superior
 attention.
 “mr. sellers, i believe?” began mr. braham.
 “beriah sellers, missouri,” was the courteous acknowledgment that the
 lawyer was correct.
 “mr. sellers; you know the parties here, you are a friend of the family?”
 “know them all, from infancy, sir. it was me, sir, that induced silas
 hawkins, judge hawkins, to come to missouri, and make his fortune. it was
 by my advice and in company with me, sir, that he went into the operation
 of—”
 “yes, yes. mr. sellers, did you know a major lackland?”
 “knew him, well, sir, knew him and honored him, sir. he was one of the
 most remarkable men of our country, sir. a member of congress. he was
 often at my mansion sir, for weeks. he used to say to me, ‘col. sellers,
 if you would go into politics, if i had you for a colleague, we should
 show calhoun and webster that the brain of the country didn’t lie east of
 the alleganies. but i said—”
 “yes, yes. i believe major lackland is not living, colonel?”
 there was an almost imperceptible sense of pleasure betrayed in the
 colonel’s face at this prompt acknowledgment of his title.
 “bless you, no. died years ago, a miserable death, sir, a ruined man, a
 poor sot. he was suspected of selling his vote in congress, and probably
 he did; the disgrace killed him, he was an outcast, sir, loathed by
 himself and by his constituents. and i think, sir”——
 the judge. “you will confine yourself, col. sellers to the questions of
 the counsel.”
 “of course, your honor. this,” continued the colonel in confidential
 explanation, “was twenty years ago. i shouldn’t have thought of referring
 to such a trifling circumstance now. if i remember rightly, sir”—
 a bundle of letters was here handed to the witness.
 “do you recognize, that hand-writing?”
 “as if it was my own, sir. it’s major lackland’s. i was knowing to these
 letters when judge hawkins received them. [the colonel’s memory was a
 little at fault here. mr. hawkins had never gone into details with him on
 this subject.] he used to show them to me, and say, ‘col, sellers you’ve a
 mind to untangle this sort of thing.’ lord, how everything comes back to
 me. laura was a little thing then. ‘the judge and i were just laying our
 plans to buy the pilot knob, and—”
 “colonel, one moment. your honor, we put these letters in evidence.”
 the letters were a portion of the correspondence of major lackland with
 silas hawkins; parts of them were missing and important letters were
 referred to that were not here. they related, as the reader knows, to
 laura’s father. lackland had come upon the track of a man who was
 searching for a lost child in a mississippi steamboat explosion years
 before. the man was lame in one leg, and appeared to be flitting from
 place to place. it seemed that major lackland got so close track of him
 that he was able to describe his personal appearance and learn his name.
 but the letter containing these particulars was lost. once he heard of him
 at a hotel in washington; but the man departed, leaving an empty trunk,
 the day before the major went there. there was something very mysterious
 in all his movements.
 col. sellers, continuing his testimony, said that he saw this lost letter,
 but could not now recall the name. search for the supposed father had been
 continued by lackland, hawkins and himself for several years, but laura
 was not informed of it till after the death of hawkins, for fear of
 raising false hopes in her mind.
 here the district attorney arose and said,
 “your honor, i must positively object to letting the witness wander off
 into all these irrelevant details.”
 mr. braham. “i submit your honor, that we cannot be interrupted in this
 manner. we have suffered the state to have full swing. now here is a
 witness, who has known the prisoner from infancy, and is competent to
 testify upon the one point vital to her safety. evidently he is a
 gentleman of character, and his knowledge of the case cannot be shut out
 without increasing the aspect of persecution which the state’s attitude
 towards the prisoner already has assumed.”
 the wrangle continued, waxing hotter and hotter. the colonel seeing the
 attention of the counsel and court entirely withdrawn from him, thought he
 perceived here his opportunity, turning and beaming upon the jury, he
 began simply to talk, but as the grandeur of his position grew upon him—his
 talk broadened unconsciously into an oratorical vein.
 “you see how she was situated, gentlemen; poor child, it might have broken
 her heart to let her mind get to running on such a thing as that. you see,
 from what we could make out her father was lame in the left leg and had a
 deep scar on his left forehead. and so ever since the day she found out
 she had another father, she never could run across a lame stranger without
 being taken all over with a shiver, and almost fainting where she stood.
 and the next minute she would go right after that man. once she stumbled
 on a stranger with a game leg; and she was the most grateful thing in this
 world—but it was the wrong leg, and it was days and days before she
 could leave her bed.
 once she found a man with a scar on his forehead and she was just going to
 throw herself into his arms, but he stepped out just then, and there
 wasn’t anything the matter with his legs. time and time again, gentlemen
 of the jury, has this poor suffering orphan flung herself on her knees
 with all her heart’s gratitude in her eyes before some scarred and
 crippled veteran, but always, always to be disappointed, always to be
 plunged into new despair—if his legs were right his scar was wrong,
 if his scar was right his legs were wrong. never could find a man that
 would fill the bill. gentlemen of the jury; you have hearts, you have
 feelings, you have warm human sympathies; you can feel for this poor
 suffering child. gentlemen of the jury, if i had time, if i had the
 opportunity, if i might be permitted to go on and tell you the thousands
 and thousands and thousands of mutilated strangers this poor girl has
 started out of cover, and hunted from city to city, from state to state,
 from continent to continent, till she has run them down and found they
 wan’t the ones; i know your hearts—”
 by this time the colonel had become so warmed up, that his voice, had
 reached a pitch above that of the contending counsel; the lawyers suddenly
 stopped, and they and the judge turned towards the colonel and remained
 for several seconds too surprised at this novel exhibition to speak. in
 this interval of silence, an appreciation of the situation gradually stole
 over the audience, and an explosion of laughter followed, in which even
 the court and the bar could hardly keep from joining.
 sheriff. “order in the court.”
 the judge. “the witness will confine his remarks to answers to questions.”
 the colonel turned courteously to the judge and said,
 “certainly, your honor—certainly. i am not well acquainted with the
 forms of procedure in the courts of new york, but in the west, sir, in the
 west—”
 the judge. “there, there, that will do, that will do!”
 “you see, your honor, there were no questions asked me, and i thought i
 would take advantage of the lull in the proceedings to explain to the jury
 a very significant train of—”
 the judge. “that will do sir! proceed mr. braham.”
 “col. sellers, have you any reason to suppose that this man is still
 living?”
 “every reason, sir, every reason.
 “state why”
 “i have never heard of his death, sir. it has never come to my knowledge.
 in fact, sir, as i once said to governor—”
 “will you state to the jury what has been the effect of the knowledge of
 this wandering and evidently unsettled being, supposed to be her father,
 upon the mind of miss hawkins for so many years!”
 question objected to. question ruled out.
 cross-examined. “major sellers, what is your occupation?”
 the colonel looked about him loftily, as if casting in his mind what would
 be the proper occupation of a person of such multifarious interests and
 then said with dignity:
 “a gentleman, sir. my father used to always say, sir”—
 “capt. sellers, did you ever see this man, this supposed father?”
 “no, sir. but upon one occasion, old senator thompson said to me, its my
 opinion, colonel sellers”—
 “did you ever see any body who had seen him?”
 “no, sir: it was reported around at one time, that”—
 “that is all.”
 the defense then spent a day in the examination of medical experts in
 insanity who testified, on the evidence heard, that sufficient causes had
 occurred to produce an insane mind in the prisoner. numerous cases were
 cited to sustain this opinion. there was such a thing as momentary
 insanity, in which the person, otherwise rational to all appearances, was
 for the time actually bereft of reason, and not responsible for his acts.
 the causes of this momentary possession could often be found in the
 person’s life. [it afterwards came out that the chief expert for the
 defense, was paid a thousand dollars for looking into the case.]
 the prosecution consumed another day in the examination of experts
 refuting the notion of insanity. these causes might have produced
 insanity, but there was no evidence that they have produced it in this
 case, or that the prisoner was not at the time of the commission of the
 crime in full possession of her ordinary faculties.
 the trial had now lasted two weeks. it required four days now for the
 lawyers to “sum up.” these arguments of the counsel were very important to
 their friends, and greatly enhanced their reputation at the bar but they
 have small interest to us. mr. braham in his closing speech surpassed
 himself; his effort is still remembered as the greatest in the criminal
 annals of new york.
 mr. braham re-drew for the jury the picture of laura’s early life; he
 dwelt long upon that painful episode of the pretended marriage and the
 desertion. col. selby, he said, belonged, gentlemen; to what is called the
 “upper classes.” it is the privilege of the “upper classes” to prey upon
 the sons and daughters of the people. the hawkins family, though allied to
 the best blood of the south, were at the time in humble circumstances. he
 commented upon her parentage. perhaps her agonized father, in his
 intervals of sanity, was still searching for his lost daughter. would he
 one day hear that she had died a felon’s death? society had pursued her,
 fate had pursued her, and in a moment of delirium she had turned and
 defied fate and society. he dwelt upon the admission of base wrong in col.
 selby’s dying statement. he drew a vivid picture of the villain at last
 overtaken by the vengeance of heaven. would the jury say that this
 retributive justice, inflicted by an outraged, and deluded woman, rendered
 irrational by the most cruel wrongs, was in the nature of a foul,
 premeditated murder? “gentlemen; it is enough for me to look upon the life
 of this most beautiful and accomplished of her sex, blasted by the
 heartless villainy of man, without seeing, at the end of it; the horrible
 spectacle of a gibbet. gentlemen, we are all human, we have all sinned, we
 all have need of mercy. but i do not ask mercy of you who are the
 guardians of society and of the poor waifs, its sometimes wronged victims;
 i ask only that justice which you and i shall need in that last, dreadful
 hour, when death will be robbed of half its terrors if we can reflect that
 we have never wronged a human being. gentlemen, the life of this lovely
 and once happy girl, this now stricken woman, is in your hands.”
 the jury were visibly affected. half the court room was in tears. if a
 vote of both spectators and jury could have been taken then, the verdict
 would have been, “let her go, she has suffered enough.”
 but the district attorney had the closing argument. calmly and without
 malice or excitement he reviewed the testimony. as the cold facts were
 unrolled, fear settled upon the listeners. there was no escape from the
 murder or its premeditation. laura’s character as a lobbyist in washington
 which had been made to appear incidentally in the evidence was also
 against her: the whole body of the testimony of the defense was shown to
 be irrelevant, introduced only to excite sympathy, and not giving a color
 of probability to the absurd supposition of insanity. the attorney then
 dwelt upon the insecurity of life in the city, and the growing immunity
 with which women committed murders. mr. mcflinn made a very able speech;
 convincing the reason without touching the feelings.
 the judge in his charge reviewed the testimony with great show of
 impartiality. he ended by saying that the verdict must be acquittal or
 murder in the first degree. if you find that the prisoner committed a
 homicide, in possession of her reason and with premeditation, your verdict
 will be accordingly. if you find she was not in her right mind, that she
 was the victim of insanity, hereditary or momentary, as it has been
 explained, your verdict will take that into account.
 as the judge finished his charge, the spectators anxiously watched the
 faces of the jury. it was not a remunerative study. in the court room the
 general feeling was in favor of laura, but whether this feeling extended
 to the jury, their stolid faces did not reveal. the public outside hoped
 for a conviction, as it always does; it wanted an example; the newspapers
 trusted the jury would have the courage to do its duty. when laura was
 convicted, then the public would turn around and abuse the governor if he
 did not pardon her.
 the jury went out. mr. braham preserved his serene confidence, but laura’s
 friends were dispirited. washington and col. sellers had been obliged to
 go to washington, and they had departed under the unspoken fear the
 verdict would be unfavorable, a disagreement was the best they could hope
 for, and money was needed. the necessity of the passage of the university
 bill was now imperative.
 the court waited for some time, but the jury gave no signs of coming in.
 mr. braham said it was extraordinary. the court then took a recess for a
 couple of hours. upon again coming in, word was brought that the jury had
 not yet agreed.
 but the jury had a question. the point upon which they wanted instruction
 was this. they wanted to know if col. sellers was related to the hawkins
 family. the court then adjourned till morning.
 mr. braham, who was in something of a pet, remarked to mr. o’toole that
 they must have been deceived—that juryman with the broken nose could
 read!
 the momentous day was at hand—a day that promised to make or mar the
 fortunes of hawkins family for all time. washington hawkins and col.
 sellers were both up early, for neither of them could sleep. congress was
 expiring, and was passing bill after bill as if they were gasps and each
 likely to be its last. the university was on file for its third reading
 this day, and to-morrow washington would be a millionaire and sellers no
 longer, impecunious but this day, also, or at farthest the next, the jury
 in laura’s case would come to a decision of some kind or other—they
 would find her guilty, washington secretly feared, and then the care and
 the trouble would all come back again, and these would be wearing months
 of besieging judges for new trials; on this day, also, the re-election of
 mr. dilworthy to the senate would take place. so washington’s mind was in
 a state of turmoil; there were more interests at stake than it could
 handle with serenity. he exulted when he thought of his millions; he was
 filled with dread when he thought of laura. but sellers was excited and
 happy. he said:
 “everything is going right, everything’s going perfectly right. pretty
 soon the telegrams will begin to rattle in, and then you’ll see, my boy.
 let the jury do what they please; what difference is it going to make?
 to-morrow we can send a million to new york and set the lawyers at work on
 the judges; bless your heart they will go before judge after judge and
 exhort and beseech and pray and shed tears. they always do; and they
 always win, too. and they will win this time. they will get a writ of
 habeas corpus, and a stay of proceedings, and a supersedeas, and a new
 trial and a nolle prosequi, and there you are! that’s the routine, and
 it’s no trick at all to a new york lawyer. that’s the regular routine—everything’s
 red tape and routine in the law, you see; it’s all greek to you, of
 course, but to a man who is acquainted with those things it’s mere—i’ll
 explain it to you sometime. everything’s going to glide right along easy
 and comfortable now. you’ll see, washington, you’ll see how it will be.
 and then, let me think ..... dilwortby will be elected to-day, and by day,
 after to-morrow night he will be in new york ready to put in his shovel—and
 you haven’t lived in washington all this time not to know that the people
 who walk right by a senator whose term is up without hardly seeing him
 will be down at the deepo to say ‘welcome back and god bless you; senator,
 i’m glad to see you, sir!’ when he comes along back re-elected, you know.
 well, you see, his influence was naturally running low when he left here,
 but now he has got a new six-years’ start, and his suggestions will simply
 just weigh a couple of tons a-piece day after tomorrow. lord bless you he
 could rattle through that habeas corpus and supersedeas and all those
 things for laura all by himself if he wanted to, when he gets back.”
 “i hadn’t thought of that,” said washington, brightening, “but it is so. a
 newly-elected senator is a power, i know that.”
 “yes indeed he is.—why it, is just human nature. look at me. when we
 first came here, i was mr. sellers, and major sellers, captain sellers,
 but nobody could ever get it right, somehow; but the minute our bill went,
 through the house, i was col. sellers every time. and nobody could do
 enough for me, and whatever i said was wonderful, sir, it was always
 wonderful; i never seemed to say any flat things at all. it was colonel,
 won’t you come and dine with us; and colonel why don’t we ever see you at
 our house; and the colonel says this; and the colonel says that; and we
 know such-and-such is so-and-so because my husband heard col. sellers say
 so. don’t you see? well, the senate adjourned and left our bill high, and
 dry, and i’ll be hanged if i warn’t old sellers from that day, till our
 bill passed the house again last week. now i’m the colonel again; and if i
 were to eat all the dinners i am invited to, i reckon i’d wear my teeth
 down level with my gums in a couple of weeks.”
 “well i do wonder what you will be to-morrow; colonel, after the president
 signs the bill!”
 “general, sir?—general, without a doubt. yes, sir, tomorrow it will
 be general, let me congratulate you, sir; general, you’ve done a great
 work, sir;—you’ve done a great work for the niggro; gentlemen allow
 me the honor to introduce my friend general sellers, the humane friend of
 the niggro. lord bless me; you’ll’ see the newspapers say, general sellers
 and servants arrived in the city last night and is stopping at the fifth
 avenue; and general sellers has accepted a reception and banquet by the
 cosmopolitan club; you’ll see the general’s opinions quoted, too—and
 what the general has to say about the propriety of a new trial and a
 habeas corpus for the unfortunate miss hawkins will not be without weight
 in influential quarters, i can tell you.”
 “and i want to be the first to shake your faithful old hand and salute you
 with your new honors, and i want to do it now—general!” said
 washington, suiting the action to the word, and accompanying it with all
 the meaning that a cordial grasp and eloquent eyes could give it.
 the colonel was touched; he was pleased and proud, too; his face answered
 for that.
 not very long after breakfast the telegrams began to arrive. the first was
 from braham, and ran thus:
 “we feel certain that the verdict will be rendered to-day. be it good or
 bad, let it find us ready to make the next move instantly, whatever it
 may be.”
 “that’s the right talk,” said sellers. “that braham’s a wonderful man. he
 was the only man there that really understood me; he told me so himself,
 afterwards.”
 the next telegram was from mr. dilworthy:
 “i have not only brought over the great invincible, but through him a
 dozen more of the opposition. shall be re-elected to-day by an
 overwhelming majority.”
 “good again!” said the colonel. “that man’s talent for organization is
 something marvelous. he wanted me to go out there and engineer that thing,
 but i said, no, dilworthy, i must be on hand here,—both on laura’s
 account and the bill’s—but you’ve no trifling genius for
 organization yourself, said i—and i was right. you go ahead, said i—you
 can fix it—and so he has. but i claim no credit for that—if i
 stiffened up his back-bone a little, i simply put him in the way to make
 his fight—didn’t undertake it myself. he has captured noble—.
 i consider that a splendid piece of diplomacy—splendid, sir!”
 by and by came another dispatch from new york:
 “jury still out. laura calm and firm as a statue. the report that the
 jury have brought her in guilty is false and premature.”
 “premature!” gasped washington, turning white. “then they all expect that
 sort of a verdict, when it comes in.”
 and so did he; but he had not had courage enough to put it into words. he
 had been preparing himself for the worst, but after all his preparation
 the bare suggestion of the possibility of such a verdict struck him cold
 as death.
 the friends grew impatient, now; the telegrams did not come fast enough:
 even the lightning could not keep up with their anxieties. they walked the
 floor talking disjointedly and listening for the door-bell. telegram after
 telegram came. still no result. by and by there was one which contained a
 single line:
 “court now coming in after brief recess to hear verdict. jury ready.”
 “oh, i wish they would finish!” said washington. “this suspense is killing
 me by inches!”
 then came another telegram:
 “another hitch somewhere. jury want a little more time and further
 instructions.”
 “well, well, well, this is trying,” said the colonel. and after a pause,
 “no dispatch from dilworthy for two hours, now. even a dispatch from him
 would be better than nothing, just to vary this thing.”
 they waited twenty minutes. it seemed twenty hours.
 “come!” said washington. “i can’t wait for the telegraph boy to come all
 the way up here. let’s go down to newspaper row—meet him on the
 way.”
 while they were passing along the avenue, they saw someone putting up a
 great display-sheet on the bulletin board of a newspaper office, and an
 eager crowd of men was collecting abort the place. washington and the
 colonel ran to the spot and read this:
 “tremendous sensation! startling news from saint’s rest! on first ballot
 for u. s. senator, when voting was about to begin, mr. noble rose in his
 place and drew forth a package, walked forward and laid it on the
 speaker’s desk, saying, ‘this contains $, in bank bills and was
 given me by senator dilworthy in his bed-chamber at midnight last night
 to buy—my vote for him—i wish the speaker to count the money
 and retain it to pay the expense of prosecuting this infamous traitor
 for bribery. the whole legislature was stricken speechless with dismay
 and astonishment. noble further said that there were fifty members
 present with money in their pockets, placed there by dilworthy to buy
 their votes. amidst unparalleled excitement the ballot was now taken,
 and j. w. smith elected u. s. senator; dilworthy receiving not one vote!
 noble promises damaging exposures concerning dilworthy and certain
 measures of his now pending in congress.
 “good heavens and earth!” exclaimed the colonel.
 “to the capitol!” said washington. “fly!”
 and they did fly. long before they got there the newsboys were running
 ahead of them with extras, hot from the press, announcing the astounding
 news.
 arrived in the gallery of the senate, the friends saw a curious spectacle—every
 senator held an extra in his hand and looked as interested as if it
 contained news of the destruction of the earth. not a single member was
 paying the least attention to the business of the hour.
 the secretary, in a loud voice, was just beginning to read the title of a
 bill:
 “house-bill—no. ,,—an-act-to-found-and-incorporate-the
 knobs-industrial-university! —read-first-and-second-time-considered-in-committee-of-the-whole-ordered-engrossed
 and-passed-to-third-reading-and-final passage!”
 the president—“third reading of the bill!”
 the two friends shook in their shoes. senators threw down their extras and
 snatched a word or two with each other in whispers. then the gavel rapped
 to command silence while the names were called on the ayes and nays.
 washington grew paler and paler, weaker and weaker while the lagging list
 progressed; and when it was finished, his head fell helplessly forward on
 his arms. the fight was fought, the long struggle was over, and he was a
 pauper. not a man had voted for the bill!
 col. sellers was bewildered and well nigh paralyzed, himself. but no man
 could long consider his own troubles in the presence of such suffering as
 washington’s. he got him up and supported him—almost carried him
 indeed—out of the building and into a carriage. all the way home
 washington lay with his face against the colonel’s shoulder and merely
 groaned and wept. the colonel tried as well as he could under the dreary
 circumstances to hearten him a little, but it was of no use. washington
 was past all hope of cheer, now. he only said:
 “oh, it is all over—it is all over for good, colonel. we must beg
 our bread, now. we never can get up again. it was our last chance, and it
 is gone. they will hang laura! my god they will hang her! nothing can save
 the poor girl now. oh, i wish with all my soul they would hang me
 instead!”
 arrived at home, washington fell into a chair and buried his face in his
 hands and gave full way to his misery. the colonel did not know where to
 turn nor what to do. the servant maid knocked at the door and passed in a
 telegram, saying it had come while they were gone.
 the colonel tore it open and read with the voice of a man-of-war’s
 broadside:
 the court room was packed on the morning on which the verdict of the jury
 was expected, as it had been every day of the trial, and by the same
 spectators, who had followed its progress with such intense interest.
 there is a delicious moment of excitement which the frequenter of trials
 well knows, and which he would not miss for the world. it is that instant
 when the foreman of the jury stands up to give the verdict, and before he
 has opened his fateful lips.
 the court assembled and waited. it was an obstinate jury.
 it even had another question—this intelligent jury—to ask the
 judge this morning.
 the question was this: “were the doctors clear that the deceased had no
 disease which might soon have carried him off, if he had not been shot?”
 there was evidently one jury man who didn’t want to waste life, and was
 willing to stake a general average, as the jury always does in a civil
 case, deciding not according to the evidence but reaching the verdict by
 some occult mental process.
 during the delay the spectators exhibited unexampled patience, finding
 amusement and relief in the slightest movements of the court, the prisoner
 and the lawyers. mr. braham divided with laura the attention of the house.
 bets were made by the sheriff’s deputies on the verdict, with large odds
 in favor of a disagreement.
 it was afternoon when it was announced that the jury was coming in. the
 reporters took their places and were all attention; the judge and lawyers
 were in their seats; the crowd swayed and pushed in eager expectancy, as
 the jury walked in and stood up in silence.
 judge. “gentlemen, have you agreed upon your verdict?”
 foreman. “we have.”
 judge. “what is it?”
 foreman. “not guilty.”
 a shout went up from the entire room and a tumult of cheering which the
 court in vain attempted to quell. for a few moments all order was lost.
 the spectators crowded within the bar and surrounded laura who, calmer
 than anyone else, was supporting her aged mother, who had almost fainted
 from excess of joy.
 and now occurred one of those beautiful incidents which no fiction-writer
 would dare to imagine, a scene of touching pathos, creditable to our
 fallen humanity. in the eyes of the women of the audience mr. braham was
 the hero of the occasion; he had saved the life of the prisoner; and
 besides he was such a handsome man. the women could not restrain their
 long pent-up emotions. they threw themselves upon mr. braham in a
 transport of gratitude; they kissed him again and again, the young as well
 as the advanced in years, the married as well as the ardent single women;
 they improved the opportunity with a touching self-sacrifice; in the words
 of a newspaper of the day they “lavished him with kisses.”
 it was something sweet to do; and it would be sweet for a woman to
 remember in after years, that she had kissed braham! mr. braham himself
 received these fond assaults with the gallantry of his nation, enduring
 the ugly, and heartily paying back beauty in its own coin.
 this beautiful scene is still known in new york as “the kissing of
 braham.”
 when the tumult of congratulation had a little spent itself, and order was
 restored, judge o’shaunnessy said that it now became his duty to provide
 for the proper custody and treatment of the acquitted. the verdict of the
 jury having left no doubt that the woman was of an unsound mind, with a
 kind of insanity dangerous to the safety of the community, she could not
 be permitted to go at large. “in accordance with the directions of the law
 in such cases,” said the judge, “and in obedience to the dictates of a
 wise humanity, i hereby commit laura hawkins to the care of the
 superintendent of the state hospital for insane criminals, to be held in
 confinement until the state commissioners on insanity shall order her
 discharge. mr. sheriff, you will attend at once to the execution of this
 decree.”
 laura was overwhelmed and terror-stricken. she had expected to walk forth
 in freedom in a few moments. the revulsion was terrible. her mother
 appeared like one shaken with an ague fit. laura insane! and about to be
 locked up with madmen! she had never contemplated this. mr. graham said he
 should move at once for a writ of ‘habeas corpus’.
 but the judge could not do less than his duty, the law must have its way.
 as in the stupor of a sudden calamity, and not fully comprehending it,
 mrs. hawkins saw laura led away by the officer.
 with little space for thought she was rapidly driven to the railway
 station, and conveyed to the hospital for lunatic criminals. it was only
 when she was within this vast and grim abode of madness that she realized
 the horror of her situation. it was only when she was received by the kind
 physician and read pity in his eyes, and saw his look of hopeless
 incredulity when she attempted to tell him that she was not insane; it was
 only when she passed through the ward to which she was consigned and saw
 the horrible creatures, the victims of a double calamity, whose dreadful
 faces she was hereafter to see daily, and was locked into the small, bare
 room that was to be her home, that all her fortitude forsook her. she sank
 upon the bed, as soon as she was left alone—she had been searched by
 the matron—and tried to think. but her brain was in a whirl. she
 recalled braham’s speech, she recalled the testimony regarding her lunacy.
 she wondered if she were not mad; she felt that she soon should be among
 these loathsome creatures. better almost to have died, than to slowly go
 mad in this confinement.
 —we beg the reader’s pardon. this is not history, which has just
 been written. it is really what would have occurred if this were a novel.
 if this were a work of fiction, we should not dare to dispose of laura
 otherwise. true art and any attention to dramatic proprieties required it.
 the novelist who would turn loose upon society an insane murderess could
 not escape condemnation. besides, the safety of society, the decencies of
 criminal procedure, what we call our modern civilization, all would demand
 that laura should be disposed of in the manner we have described.
 foreigners, who read this sad story, will be unable to understand any
 other termination of it.
 but this is history and not fiction. there is no such law or custom as
 that to which his honor is supposed to have referred; judge o’shaunnessy
 would not probably pay any attention to it if there were. there is no
 hospital for insane criminals; there is no state commission of lunacy.
 what actually occurred when the tumult in the court room had subsided the
 sagacious reader will now learn.
 laura left the court room, accompanied by her mother and other friends,
 amid the congratulations of those assembled, and was cheered as she
 entered a carriage, and drove away. how sweet was the sunlight, how
 exhilarating the sense of freedom! were not these following cheers the
 expression of popular approval and affection? was she not the heroine of
 the hour?
 it was with a feeling of triumph that laura reached her hotel, a scornful
 feeling of victory over society with its own weapons.
 mrs. hawkins shared not at all in this feeling; she was broken with the
 disgrace and the long anxiety.
 “thank god, laura,” she said, “it is over. now we will go away from this
 hateful city. let us go home at once.”
 “mother,” replied laura, speaking with some tenderness, “i cannot go with
 you. there, don’t cry, i cannot go back to that life.”
 mrs. hawkins was sobbing. this was more cruel than anything else, for she
 had a dim notion of what it would be to leave laura to herself.
 “no, mother, you have been everything to me. you know how dearly i love
 you. but i cannot go back.”
 a boy brought in a telegraphic despatch. laura took it and read:
 “the bill is lost. dilworthy ruined. (signed) washington.”
 for a moment the words swam before her eyes. the next her eyes flashed
 fire as she handed the dispatch to her mother and bitterly said,
 “the world is against me. well, let it be, let it. i am against it.”
 “this is a cruel disappointment,” said mrs. hawkins, to whom one grief
 more or less did not much matter now, “to you and, washington; but we must
 humbly bear it.”
 “bear it;” replied laura scornfully, “i’ve all my life borne it, and fate
 has thwarted me at every step.”
 a servant came to the door to say that there was a gentleman below who
 wished to speak with miss hawkins. “j. adolphe griller” was the name laura
 read on the card. “i do not know such a person. he probably comes from
 washington. send him up.”
 mr. griller entered. he was a small man, slovenly in dress, his tone
 confidential, his manner wholly void of animation, all his features below
 the forehead protruding—particularly the apple of his throat—hair
 without a kink in it, a hand with no grip, a meek, hang-dog countenance.
 he was a falsehood done in flesh and blood; for while every visible sign
 about him proclaimed him a poor, witless, useless weakling, the truth was
 that he had the brains to plan great enterprises and the pluck to carry
 them through. that was his reputation, and it was a deserved one. he
 softly said:
 “i called to see you on business, miss hawkins. you have my card?”
 laura bowed.
 mr. griller continued to purr, as softly as before.
 “i will proceed to business. i am a business man. i am a lecture-agent,
 miss hawkins, and as soon as i saw that you were acquitted, it occurred to
 me that an early interview would be mutually beneficial.”
 “i don’t understand you, sir,” said laura coldly.
 “no? you see, miss hawkins, this is your opportunity. if you will enter
 the lecture field under good auspices, you will carry everything before
 you.”
 “but, sir, i never lectured, i haven’t any lecture, i don’t know anything
 about it.”
 “ah, madam, that makes no difference—no real difference. it is not
 necessary to be able to lecture in order to go into the lecture tour. if
 ones name is celebrated all over the land, especially, and, if she is also
 beautiful, she is certain to draw large audiences.”
 “but what should i lecture about?” asked laura, beginning in spite of
 herself to be a little interested as well as amused.
 “oh, why; woman—something about woman, i should say; the marriage
 relation, woman’s fate, anything of that sort. call it the revelations of
 a woman’s life; now, there’s a good title. i wouldn’t want any better
 title than that. i’m prepared to make you an offer, miss hawkins, a
 liberal offer,—twelve thousand dollars for thirty nights.”
 laura thought. she hesitated. why not? it would give her employment,
 money. she must do something.
 “i will think of it, and let you know soon. but still, there is very
 little likelihood that i—however, we will not discuss it further
