re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license
title: the old goat
author: charles l. fontenay
release date: june ,  [ebook #]
language: english
character set encoding: ascii
produced by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net
it's been said that the soul is the
form that makes the body—which may
just possibly explain what happened
on that fatal day at ivy college....
[transcriber's note: this etext was produced from
worlds of if science fiction, february .
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the u.s. copyright on this publication was renewed.]
dr. angstrom was known to his students and many of his colleagues on
the faculty as "the old goat." very appropriate, that name. he had the
disposition of a goat with dyspepsia, he had the cold blue eyes of a
goat, he had the waggling whiskers of a goat. perhaps it's in memory of
dr. angstrom that ivy college has a goat for its mascot now.
dr. angstrom was even more goatish than usual that day last summer when
half a dozen top scientists in the field gathered to see his preview
experiment on matter transmission of a live animal. he had been working
hard for weeks on the transmitter and keeping up classes at the same
time, which did not improve his disposition. besides, he had a real
goat for an experimental animal, and goats are notoriously hard on the
nervous system.
this particular animal, at the moment the scientists entered, was
straining at his rope, trying to get a mouthful of a tablecloth which
graced a nearby table full of jars and retorts. failing this, the goat
exhibited that typical lack of discrimination in matters edible and
began to chew on his rope.
i felt a little out of place among all these giant brains. my reason
for being there was that i had been serving, during my college career,
as sort of a factotum and fetch-and-carry man for dr. angstrom, and
i was to take notes for him. i had acquired considerable affection
for the old goat. maybe that's one reason i hate to see his great
scientific work kept under wraps because people still insist it's
dangerous.
"i have proved to my own satisfaction that the matter transmitter
works," dr. angstrom told the assembled scientists. "i have made a
number of transmissions of inanimate matter. in theory, it should work
just as well for animate objects and i have invited you to be present
at the first test of this theory.
"i need not go into detail with you about the basic theory of matter
transmission. the transmitter itself picks up the atomic and
electronic 'image' of the object inside it, much as a television
scanner picks up a scene, except that it is done in three dimensions
instead of two. this is made possible by the four-dimensional element
which is the heart of the apparatus and was made available to us
through recent intra-atomic research.
"the receiver picks up the image as a television receiver does, except
again in three dimensions. the matter is not duplicated because the
transmitter strips down the object within it as it transmits.
"now the question that has been raised by some scientists about the
transmission of animate objects is whether the 'soul' or 'life force'
can be transmitted. i consider this question ridiculous, and will prove
it so. it is my contention that such 'life force' is not a thing apart
from the physical shell."
the matter transmitter was a large closed cylinder on one side of the
room. the receiver was a similar cylinder on the other. both were
raised slightly from the floor.
as sort of hors d'oeuvre, dr. angstrom transmitted a large chunk of
lead across the room, then a glass jar. in each case, the object was
placed in the transmitter and a moment later removed from the receiver
across the room. there was no possible way for it to have been moved
across the intervening space except by broadcast transmission.
"as you see," said dr. angstrom, "i have eliminated the necessity for
a switch by building the switch into the door of the transmitter. as
soon as the door is closed, transmission occurs. now we shall send our
animate object."
he untied the goat and, with some difficulty, hauled the animal by its
collar to the transmitter. there the goat balked and dr. angstrom,
having got its head through the door, got behind it and shoved
heartily, hanging onto the edge of the door so he could shut it quickly
when the goat was inside.
as goats will, the goat suddenly changed its mind and leaped into the
transmitter. caught off balance, dr. angstrom fell in after it—and the
door, given a last frantic jerk, slammed on them both.
there were gasps of horror and alarm from the scientists, but i held
up my hand to calm them.
"there's no danger, gentlemen," i said. "it's just as well this way. i
happen to know that dr. angstrom's next step, after proving to you with
the goat that animate objects could be transmitted, was to prove that
human beings also could be transmitted. he planned to be his own first
subject."
with serene confidence, i went to the receiver and threw open the door.
just as i had anticipated, the goat leaped out, unharmed, followed by
dr. angstrom.
"i told you animate objects could be transmitted successfully," said
the goat triumphantly.
"baa!" said dr. angstrom, and began eating the tablecloth.
end of the project gutenberg ebook of the old goat, by charles l. fontenay
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections  and 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section . information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is -. its (c)() letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at  melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at
 north  west, salt lake city, ut , () -, email
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org
for additional contact information:
 dr. gregory b. newby
 chief executive and director
 gbnewby@pglaf.org
section . information about donations to the project gutenberg
