 the culprits flung themselves prone, in an ecstasy of gratitude, and
 kissed his feet, declaring that they would never forget his goodness and
 never cease to pray for him as long as they lived. they were sincere, for
 like a god he had stretched forth his mighty hand and closed the gates of
 hell against them. he knew, himself, that he had done a noble and gracious
 thing, and was privately well pleased with his magnanimity; and that night
 he set the incident down in his diary, so that his son might read it in
 after years, and be thereby moved to deeds of gentleness and humanity
 himself.
roxy plays a shrewd trick.
	 whoever has lived long enough to find out what life is,
 knows how deep a debt of gratitude we owe to adam, the first
 		great benefactor of our race. he brought death into the
 		world.—pudd’nhead wilson’s calendar.
percy driscoll slept well the night he saved 
			his house-minions from going down the river, but no wink of sleep visited 
			roxy’s eyes. a profound terror had taken possession of her. her 
			child could grow up and be sold down the river! the thought crazed her 
			with horror. if she dozed and lost herself for a moment, the next moment 
			she was on her feet flying to her child’s cradle to see if it was 
			still there. then she would gather it to her heart and pour out her love 
			upon it in a frenzy of kisses, moaning, crying, and saying, “dey 
			sha’n’t, oh, dey sha’n’t!—yo’ 
			po’ mammy will kill you fust!”
 once, when she was tucking it back in its 
			cradle again, the other child nestled in its sleep and attracted her 
			attention. she went and stood over it a long time communing with herself:
 “what has my po’ baby done, dat he couldn’t have 
			yo’ luck? he hain’t done noth’n’. god was good 
			to you; why warn’t he good to him? dey can’t sell you
 down de river. i hates yo’ pappy; he hain’t got no 
			heart—for niggers he hain’t, anyways. i hates him, en i 
			could kill him!” she paused awhile, thinking; then she burst into 
			wild sobbings again, and turned away, saying, “oh, i got to 
			kill my chile, dey ain’t no yuther way,—killin’
 him wouldn’t save de chile fum goin’ down de river. 
			oh, i got to do it, yo’ po’ mammy’s got to kill you 
			to save you, honey”—she gathered her baby to her bosom, now, 
			and began to smother it with caresses—“mammy’s got
 to kill you—how kin i do it! but yo’ mammy ain’t 
			gwine to desert you—no, no; dah, don’t cry—she 
			gwine wid you, she gwine to kill herself too. come along, honey, 
			come along wid mammy; we gwine to jump in de river, den de troubles 
			o’ dis worl’ 
			is all over—dey don’t sell po’ niggers down the river 
			over yonder.”
 she started toward the door, crooning to the child and hushing it; midway
 she stopped, suddenly. she had caught sight of her new sunday gown—a
 cheap curtain-calico thing, a conflagration of gaudy colors and fantastic
 figures. she surveyed it wistfully, longingly.
 “hain’t ever wore it yet,” she said, “en 
			it’s jist lovely.” then she nodded her head in response to a 
			pleasant idea, and added, “no, i ain’t gwine to be fished out, 
			wid everybody lookin’ at me, in dis mis’able ole 
			linsey-woolsey.”
 she put down the child and made the change. she looked in the glass and
 was astonished at her beauty. she resolved to make her death-toilet
 perfect. she took off her handkerchief-turban and dressed her glossy
 wealth of hair “like white folks”; she added 
			some odds and ends of rather lurid ribbon and a spray of atrocious 
			artificial flowers; finally she threw over her shoulders a fluffy thing 
			called a “cloud” in that day, which was of a blazing red 
			complexion. then she was ready for the
			tomb.
 she gathered up her baby once more; but when her eye fell upon its
 miserably short little gray tow-linen shirt and noted the contrast between
 its pauper shabbiness and her own volcanic irruption of infernal 
			splendors, her mother-heart was touched, and she was ashamed.
 “no, dolling, mammy ain’t gwine to treat you so. de angels 
			is gwine to ’mire you jist as much as dey does yo’ mammy. 
			ain’t gwine to have ’em putt’n’ dey han’s 
			up ’fo’ dey eyes en sayin’ to david en goliah en dem
 yuther prophets, ‘dat chile is dress’ too indelicate 
			fo’ dis place.’”
 by this time she had stripped off the shirt. now she clothed the naked
 little creature in one of thomas à becket’s snowy long 
			baby-gowns, with its bright blue bows and dainty flummery of ruffles.
 “dah—now you’s fixed.” she propped the child 
			in a chair and stood off to inspect it. straightway her eyes began to 
			widen with astonishment and admiration, and she clapped her hands and 
			cried out, “why, it do beat all!—i never knowed 
			you was so lovely. 
			marse tommy ain’t a bit puttier—not a single bit.”
 she stepped over and glanced at the other infant; she flung a glance back
 at her own; then one more at the heir of the house. now a strange light
 dawned in her eyes, and in a moment she was lost in thought. she seemed in
 a trance; when she came out of it she muttered, “when i ’uz 
			a-washin’ ’em in de tub, yistiddy, his own pappy asked me 
			which of ’em was his’n.”
 she began to move about like one in a dream. she undressed thomas 
			à becket, stripping him of everything, and put the tow-linen 
			shirt on him. she put his coral necklace on her own child’s neck. 
			then she placed the children side by side, and after earnest inspection 
			she muttered—
 “now who would b’lieve clo’es could do de like 
			o’ dat? dog my cats if it ain’t all i kin do to 
			tell t’other fum which, let alone his pappy.”
 she put her cub in tommy’s elegant cradle and said—
 “you’s young marse tom fum dis out, en 
			i got to practise and git used to ’memberin’ to call you dat, 
			honey, or i’s gwine to make a mistake some time en git us bofe into 
			trouble. dah—now you lay still en don’t fret no mo’, 
			marse tom—oh, thank de good lord in heaven, you’s saved, 
			you’s saved!—dey ain’t no man kin ever sell 
			mammy’s po’ little honey down de river now!”
 she put the heir of the house in her own child’s unpainted pine 
			cradle, and said, contemplating its slumbering form uneasily—
 “i’s sorry for you, honey; i’s sorry, god knows i 
			is,—but what kin i do, what could i do? yo’ 
			pappy would sell him to somebody, some time, en den he’d go down 
			de river, sho’, en i couldn’t, couldn’t, 
			couldn’t stan’ it.”
 she flung herself on her bed and began to think and toss, toss and think.
 by and by she sat suddenly upright, for a comforting thought had flown
 through her worried mind—
 “’tain’t no sin—white folks has done it! 
			it ain’t no sin, glory to goodness it ain’t no sin! 
			dey’s done it—yes, en dey was de biggest quality 
			in de whole bilin’, too—kings!”
 she began to muse; she was trying to gather out of her memory the dim
 particulars of some tale she had heard some time or other. at last she
 said—
 “now i’s got it; now i ’member. it was dat ole nigger 
			preacher dat tole it, de time he come over here fum illinois en preached 
			in de nigger church. he said dey ain’t nobody kin save his own 
			self—can’t do it by faith, can’t do it by works, 
			can’t do it no way at all. free grace is de on’y 
			way, en dat don’t come fum nobody but jis’ de lord; 
			en he kin give it to anybody he please,
			saint or sinner—he don’t kyer. he do jis’ as 
			he’s a mineter. he s’lect out anybody dat suit him, en
 put another one in his place, and make de fust one happy forever en leave
 t’other one to burn wid satan. de preacher said it was jist like 
			dey done in englan’ one time, long time ago. de queen she 
			lef’ her baby layin’ aroun’ one day, en went out 
			callin’; en one o’ de niggers roun’-’bout de
 place dat was ’mos’ white, she come in en see de chile 
			layin’ aroun’, en tuck en put her own chile’s 
			clo’es on de queen’s chile, en put de queen’s
 chile’s clo’es on her own 
			chile, en den lef’ her own chile layin’ aroun’ en tuck 
			en toted de queen’s chile home to de nigger-quarter, en nobody ever 
			foun’ it out, en her chile was de king bimeby, en sole de 
			queen’s chile down de river one time when dey had to settle up de 
			estate. dah, now—de preacher said it his own self, en it 
			ain’t no sin, ’ca’se white folks done it. dey 
			done it—yes, dey done it; en not on’y jis’ 
			common white folks nuther, but de biggest quality dey is in de whole 
			bilin’. oh, i’s so glad i ’member ’bout 
			dat!”
 she got up light-hearted and happy, and went to the cradles and spent what
 was left of the night “practising.” she would give her 
			own child a light pat and say humbly, “lay still, marse 
			tom,” then give the real tom a pat and say with severity, 
			“lay still, chambers!—does you want me to
 take somep’n’ to you?”
 as she progressed with her practice, she was surprised to see how steadily
 and surely the awe which had kept her tongue reverent and her manner
 humble toward her young master was transferring itself to her speech 
			and manner toward the usurper, and how similarly handy she was becoming in
 transferring her motherly curtness of speech and peremptoriness of manner
 to the unlucky heir of the ancient house of driscoll.
 she took occasional rests from practising, and absorbed herself in
 calculating her chances.
 “dey’ll sell dese niggers to-day fo’ stealin’ 
			de money, den dey’ll buy some mo’ dat don’t know 
			de chillen—so dat’s all right. when i takes
 de chillen out to git de air, de minute i’s roun’ de 
			corner i’s gwine to gaum dey mouths all roun’ wid jam, 
			den dey can’t nobody notice dey’s changed. yes, 
			i gwineter do dat till i’s safe, if it’s a year.
 “dey ain’t but one man dat i’s afeard of, en 
			dat’s dat pudd’nhead wilson. dey calls him a pudd’nhead, 
			en says he’s a fool. my lan’, dat man ain’t no
 mo’ fool den i is! he’s de smartes’ man in dis town, 
			less’n it’s jedge driscoll or maybe pem howard. blame dat man, 
			he worries me wid dem ornery glasses o’ hisn; i 
			b’lieve he’s a witch. but nemmine, i’s gwine to
 happen aroun’ dah one o’ dese days en let on dat i reckon 
			he wants to print 
			de chillen’s fingers ag’in; en if he
			don’t notice dey’s changed, i bound dey ain’t nobody 
			gwine to notice it, en den i’s safe, sho’. but i
 reckon i’ll tote along a hoss-shoe to keep off de witch-work.”
 the new negroes gave roxy no trouble, of course. the master gave her none,
 for one of his speculations was in jeopardy, and his mind was so occupied
 that he hardly saw the children when he looked at them, and all roxy had
 to do was to get them both into a gale of laughter when he came about;
 then their faces were mainly cavities exposing gums, and he was gone again
 before the spasm passed and the little creatures resumed a human aspect.
 within a few days the fate of the speculation became so dubious that mr.
 percy went away with his brother the judge, to see what could be done
 with it. it was a land speculation as usual, and it had gotten 
			complicated with a lawsuit. the men were gone seven weeks. before they 
			got back roxy had paid her visit to wilson, and was satisfied. wilson took 
			the finger-prints, 
			labeled them with the names and with the date—october 
			the first—put them carefully away and continued his chat with roxy, 
			who seemed very anxious that he should admire the great advance in flesh 
			and beauty which the babies had made since he took their finger-prints a 
			month before. he complimented their improvement to her contentment; and as 
			they were without any disguise of jam or other stain, she trembled all the 
			while and was miserably frightened lest at any moment he—
 but he didn’t. he discovered nothing; and she went home jubilant,
 and dropped all concern about the matter permanently out of her mind.
the ways of the changelings.
		 adam and eve had many advantages, but the principal one
 was, that they escaped teething.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 there is this trouble about special providences—namely,
 there is so often a doubt as to which party was intended to
 be the beneficiary. in the case of the children, the bears
 and the prophet, the bears got more real satisfaction out of
 the episode than the prophet did, because they got the
 children.—pudd’nhead wilson’s calendar.
this history must henceforth accommodate 
			itself to the change which roxana has consummated, and call the real 
			heir “chambers” and the usurping little slave 
			“thomas à becket”—shortening this latter name to 
			“tom,” for daily use, as the people about him did.
 “tom” was a bad baby, from the very beginning of his 
			usurpation. he would cry for nothing; he would burst into storms of 
			devilish temper without notice, and let go 
			scream after scream and squall after squall, then climax
			the thing with “holding his breath”—that frightful 
			specialty of the teething nursling, in the throes of which the creature 
			exhausts its lungs, then is convulsed with noiseless squirmings and 
			twistings and kickings in the effort to get its breath, while the lips 
			turn blue and the mouth stands wide and rigid, offering for inspection 
			one wee tooth set in the lower rim of a hoop of red gums; and when the 
			appalling stillness has endured until one is sure the lost breath will 
			never return, a nurse comes flying, and dashes water in the child’s 
			face, and—presto! the lungs fill, and instantly discharge a shriek, 
			or a yell, or a howl which bursts the listening ear and surprises the 
			owner of it into saying words which would not go well with a halo if he 
			had one. the baby tom would claw anybody who came within reach of his 
			nails, and pound anybody he could reach with his rattle. he would scream 
			for water until he got it, and then throw cup and all on the floor and 
			scream for more. he was indulged in all his caprices, howsoever 
			troublesome and exasperating they 
			might be; he was allowed to eat anything he wanted, particularly things 
			that would give him the stomach-ache.
 when he got to be old enough to begin to toddle about and say broken words
 and get an idea of what his hands were for, he was a more consummate pest
 than ever. roxy got no rest while he was awake. he would call for anything
 and everything he saw, simply saying “awnt it!” (want it), 
			which was a command. when it was brought, he said in a frenzy, and 
			motioning it away with his hands, “don’t awnt it! 
			don’t awnt it!” and the moment it was gone
 he set up frantic yells of “awnt it! awnt it! awnt it!” 
			and roxy had to give wings to her heels to get that thing back to him 
			again before he could get time to carry out his intention of going into 
			convulsions about it.
 what he preferred above all other things was the tongs. this was because
 his “father” had forbidden him to have them lest he break 
			windows and furniture with them. the moment roxy’s back was turned 
			he would toddle to the presence of the tongs and say 
			“like it!” and cock his eye to one side to see if roxy was 
			observing; then, “awnt it!” and cock his eye again; then, 
			“hab it!” with another furtive glance; and finally, 
			“take it!”—and the prize was his. the next moment 
			the heavy implement was raised aloft; the next, there was a 
			crash and a squall, and the cat was off on three legs to meet 
			an engagement; roxy would arrive just as the lamp or a window
 went to irremediable smash.
 tom got all the petting, chambers got none. tom got all the delicacies,
 chambers got mush and milk, and clabber without sugar. in consequence tom
 was a sickly child and chambers wasn’t. tom was 
			“fractious,” as roxy called it, and overbearing; 
			chambers was meek and docile.
 with all her splendid common sense and practical every-day ability, roxy
 was a doting fool of a mother. she was this toward her child—and she
 was also more than this: by the fiction created by herself, he was become
 her master; the necessity of recognizing this relation outwardly and of
 perfecting 
			herself in the forms required to express the recognition, had moved her 
			to such diligence and faithfulness in practicing these forms that this 
			exercise soon concreted itself into habit; it became automatic and 
			unconscious; then a natural result followed: deceptions intended solely 
			for others gradually grew practically into self-deceptions as well; the 
			mock reverence became real reverence, the mock obsequiousness real 
			obsequiousness, the mock homage real homage; the little counterfeit rift 
			of separation between imitation-slave and imitation-master widened and 
			widened, and became an abyss, and a very real one—and on one side 
			of it stood roxy, the dupe of her own deceptions, and on the other stood 
			her child, no longer a usurper to her, but her accepted and recognized 
			master. he was her darling, her master, and her deity all in one, and in 
			her worship of him she forgot who she was and what he had been.
 in babyhood tom cuffed and banged and scratched chambers unrebuked, and
 chambers early learned that between meekly bearing it and resenting it,
 the advantage all lay 
			with the former policy. the few times that his persecutions had moved 
			him beyond control and made him fight back had cost him very dear at 
			headquarters; not at the hands of roxy, for if she ever went beyond 
			scolding him sharply for “forgitt’n’ who his young 
			marster was,” she at least never extended her punishment 
			beyond a box on the ear. no, percy driscoll was the person. he told 
			chambers that under no provocation whatever was he privileged to lift 
			his hand against his little master. chambers overstepped the line three 
			times, and got three such convincing canings from the man who was his 
			father and didn’t know it, that he took tom’s cruelties in 
			all humility after that, and made no more experiments.
 outside of the house the two boys were together all through their boyhood.
 chambers was strong beyond his years, and a good fighter; strong because
 he was coarsely fed and hard worked about the house, and a good fighter
 because tom furnished him plenty of practice—on white boys whom he
 hated and was afraid of. chambers was his constant 
			body-guard, to and from school; he was present on the playground at recess 
			to protect his charge. he fought himself into such a formidable 
			reputation, by and by, that tom could have changed clothes with him, and 
			“ridden in peace,” like sir kay in launcelot’s armor.
 he was good at games of skill, too. tom staked him with marbles to play
 “keeps” with, and then took all the winnings away from him. 
			in the winter season chambers was on hand, in tom’s worn-out 
			clothes, with “holy” red mittens, and “holy” 
			shoes, and pants “holy” at the knees and seat, to drag
 a sled up the hill for tom, warmly clad, to ride down on; but he never got
 a ride himself. he built snow men and snow fortifications under 
			tom’s directions. he was tom’s patient target when tom 
			wanted to do some snowballing, but the target couldn’t fire back. 
			chambers carried tom’s skates to the river and strapped them on 
			him, then trotted around after him on the ice, so as to be on hand when 
			wanted; but he wasn’t ever asked to try the skates himself.
 in summer the pet pastime of the boys of 
			dawson’s landing was to 
			steal apples, peaches, and melons from the farmers’ 
			fruit-wagons,—mainly on account of the risk they ran of getting their 
			heads laid open with the butt of the farmer’s whip. tom was a 
			distinguished adept at these thefts—by proxy. chambers did his 
			stealing, and got the peach-stones, apple-cores, and melon-rinds for 
			his share.
 tom always made chambers go in swimming with him, and stay by him as a
 protection. when tom had had enough, he would slip out and tie knots in
 chambers’s shirt, dip the knots in the water and make them hard to 
			undo, then dress himself and sit by and laugh while the naked shiverer 
			tugged at the stubborn knots with his teeth.
 tom did his humble comrade these various ill turns partly out of native
 viciousness, and partly because he hated him for his superiorities of
 physique and pluck, and for his manifold cleverness. tom couldn’t 
			dive, for it gave him splitting headaches. chambers could dive without
 inconvenience, and was fond of doing it. he excited so much admiration,
 one day, among a crowd of white boys, by throwing back somersaults from
 the stern of a canoe, that it wearied tom’s spirit, and at last he 
			shoved the canoe underneath chambers while he was in the air—so he 
			came down on his head in the canoe-bottom; and while he lay unconscious,
 several of tom’s ancient adversaries saw that their long-desired
 opportunity was come, and they gave the false heir such a drubbing that
 with chambers’s best help he was hardly able to drag himself home
 afterward.
 when the boys were fifteen and upward, tom was “showing 
			off” in the river one day, when he was taken with a cramp, and 
			shouted for help. it was a common trick with the boys—particularly 
			if a stranger was present—to pretend a cramp and howl for help; 
			then when the stranger came tearing hand over hand to the rescue, the 
			howler would go on struggling and howling till he was close at hand, 
			then replace the howl with a sarcastic smile and swim blandly away, 
			while the town boys assailed the dupe with a volley of jeers and laughter. 
			tom had never tried this joke as 
			yet, but was supposed to be trying it 
			now, so the boys held warily back; but chambers believed his master was 
			in earnest, therefore he swam out, and arrived in time, unfortunately, 
			and saved his life.
 this was the last feather. tom had managed to endure everything else, but
 to have to remain publicly and permanently under such an obligation as
 this to a nigger, and to this nigger of all niggers—this was too
 much. he heaped insults upon chambers for “pretending” 
			to think he was in earnest in calling for help, and said that anybody 
			but a block-headed nigger would have known he was funning and left him 
			alone.
 tom’s enemies were in strong force here, so they came out with their
 opinions quite freely. they laughed at him, and called him coward, liar,
 sneak, and other sorts of pet names, and told him they meant to call
 chambers
			by a new name after this, and make it common in the 
			town—“tom driscoll’s niggerpappy,”—to 
			signify that he had had a second birth into this life, and that 
			chambers was the author of his new being. tom grew frantic under 
			these taunts, and shouted—
 “knock their heads off, chambers! knock their heads off! what 
			do you stand there with your hands in your pockets for?”
 chambers expostulated, and said, “but, marse tom, dey’s 
			too many of ’em—dey’s—”
 “do you hear me?”
 “please, marse tom, don’t make me! dey’s so many of 
			’em dat—”
 tom sprang at him and drove his pocket-knife into him two or three times
 before the boys could snatch him away and give the wounded lad a chance to
 escape. he was considerably hurt, but not seriously. if the blade had been
 a little longer his career would have ended there.
 tom had long ago taught roxy “her place.” it had been 
			many a day now since she had ventured a caress or a fondling epithet 
			in his quarter. such things, from a “nigger,” were 
			repulsive to him, and she had been warned to keep her distance and 
			remember who she was. she saw her darling gradually cease from being 
			her son, she saw that detail perish utterly; all that was
 left was master—master, pure and simple, and it was not a 
			gentle mastership, either. she saw herself sink from the sublime height 
			of motherhood to the somber depths of unmodified slavery. the abyss of
 separation between her and her boy was complete. she was merely his
 chattel, now, his convenience, his dog, his cringing and helpless slave,
 the humble and unresisting victim of his capricious temper and vicious
 nature.
 sometimes she could not go to sleep, even when worn out with fatigue,
 because her rage boiled so high over the day’s experiences with 
			her boy. she would mumble and mutter to herself—
 “he struck me, en i warn’t no way to blame—struck 
			me in de face, right before folks. en he’s al’ays 
			callin’ me nigger-wench, en hussy, en all dem mean names, 
			when i’s doin’ de very bes’ i kin. oh, lord, 
			i done so much for him—i lift’ him away up to what 
			he is—en dis is what i git for it.”
 sometimes when some outrage of peculiar offensiveness stung her to the
 heart, she would plan schemes of vengeance and revel in the fancied
 spectacle of his exposure to the 
			world as an imposter and a slave; but in the midst of these joys fear 
			would strike her: she had made him too strong; she could prove nothing, 
			and—heavens, she might get sold down the river for her pains! 
			so her schemes always went for nothing, and she laid them aside in 
			impotent rage against the fates, and against herself for playing the 
			fool on that fatal september day in not providing herself with a 
			witness for use in the day when such a thing might be needed for the 
			appeasing of her vengeance-hungry heart.
 and yet the moment tom happened to be good to her, and kind,—and 
			this occurred every now and then,—all her sore places were healed, 
			and she was happy; happy and proud, for this was her son, her nigger son, 
			lording it among the whites and securely avenging their crimes against her 
			race.
 there were two grand funerals in dawson’s landing that 
			fall—the fall of . one was that of colonel cecil burleigh 
			essex, the other that of percy driscoll.
 on his death-bed driscoll set roxy free and delivered his idolized
 ostensible son 
			solemnly into the keeping of his brother, the judge and
 his wife. those childless people were glad to get him. childless people
 are not difficult to please.
 judge driscoll had gone privately to his brother, a month before, and
 bought chambers. he had heard that tom had been trying to get his father
 to sell the boy down the river, and he wanted to prevent the 
			scandal—for public sentiment did not approve of that way of 
			treating family servants for light cause or for no cause.
 percy driscoll had worn himself out in trying to save his great
 speculative landed estate, and had died without succeeding. he was hardly
 in his grave before the boom collapsed and left his hitherto envied young 
			devil of an heir a pauper. but that was nothing; his uncle told him he 
			should be his heir and have all his fortune when he died; so tom was 
			comforted.
 roxy had no home, now; so she resolved to go around and say good-by to her
 friends and then clear out and see the world—that is to say, she
 would go chambermaiding on a 
			steamboat, the darling ambition of her race and sex.
 her last call was on the black giant, jasper. she found him chopping
 pudd’nhead wilson’s winter provision of wood.
 wilson was chatting with him when roxy arrived. he asked her how she could
 bear to go off chambermaiding and leave her boys; and chaffingly offered
 to copy off a series of their finger-prints, reaching up to their twelfth
 year, for her to remember them by; but she sobered in a moment, wondering
 if he suspected anything; then she said she believed she didn’t 
			want them. wilson said to himself, “the drop of black blood in 
			her is superstitious; she thinks there’s some devilry, some 
			witch-business about my glass mystery somewhere; she used to come here 
			with an old horseshoe in her hand; it could have been an accident, but i 
			doubt it.”
the twins thrill dawson’s landing.
			 training is everything. the peach was once a bitter almond;
 	 cauliflower is nothing but cabbage with a college
 	 education.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
 remark of dr. baldwin’s, concerning upstarts: 
			 we don’t care to eat toadstools that think they 
			 are truffles.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
mrs. york driscoll enjoyed two years of bliss 
			with that prize, tom—bliss that was troubled a little at times, it 
			is true, but bliss nevertheless; then she died, and her husband and his 
			childless sister, mrs. pratt, continued the bliss-business at the old 
			stand. tom was petted and indulged and spoiled to his entire 
			content—or nearly that. this went on till he was nineteen, then he 
			was sent to yale. he went handsomely equipped with 
			“conditions,” but otherwise he was not an object of 
			distinction there. he remained at yale two years, and then threw up the 
			struggle. he came 
			home with his manners a good deal improved; he had lost his surliness and 
			brusqueness, and was rather pleasantly soft and smooth, now; he was 
			furtively, and sometimes openly, ironical of speech, and given to 
			gently touching people on the raw, but he did it with a good-natured 
			semiconscious air that carried it off safely, and kept him from getting 
			into trouble. he was as indolent as ever and showed no very strenuous 
			desire to hunt up an occupation. people argued from this that he preferred 
			to be supported by his uncle until his uncle’s shoes should become 
			vacant. he brought back one or two new habits with him, one of which he 
			rather openly practised—tippling—but concealed another which 
			was gambling. it would not do to gamble where his uncle could hear of it; 
			he knew that quite well.
 tom’s eastern polish was not popular among the young people. they 
			could have endured it, perhaps, if tom had stopped there; but he wore 
			gloves, and that they couldn’t stand, and wouldn’t; so he was 
			mainly without society. he brought home with him a suit of clothes of such 
			exquisite style and cut 
			and fashion,—eastern fashion, city fashion,—that it filled 
			everybody with anguish and was regarded as a peculiarly wanton affront. 
			he enjoyed the feeling which he was exciting, and paraded the town 
			serene and happy all day; but the young fellows set a tailor to work 
			that night, and when tom started out on his parade next morning he found 
			the old deformed negro bell-ringer straddling along in his wake tricked 
			out in a flamboyant curtain-calico exaggeration of his finery, and 
			imitating his fancy eastern graces as well as he could.
 tom surrendered, and after that clothed himself in the local fashion. but
 the dull country town was tiresome to him, since his acquaintanceship with
 livelier regions, and it grew daily more and more so. he began to make
 little trips to st. louis for refreshment. there he found companionship to
 suit him, and pleasures to his taste, along with more freedom, in some
 particulars, than he could have at home. so, during the next two years
 his visits to the city grew in frequency and his tarryings there grew
 steadily longer in duration.
 he was getting into deep waters. he was taking chances, privately, which
 might get him into trouble some day—in fact, did.
 judge driscoll had retired from the bench and from all business activities
 in , and had now been comfortably idle three years. he was president
 of the free-thinkers’ society, and pudd’nhead wilson was the 
			other member. the society’s weekly discussions were now the old 
			lawyer’s main interest in life. pudd’nhead was still toiling 
			in obscurity at the bottom of the ladder, under the blight of that unlucky 
			remark which he had let fall twenty-three years before about the dog.
 judge driscoll was his friend, and claimed that he had a mind above the
 average, but that was regarded as one of the judge’s whims, and it 
			failed to modify the public opinion. or rather, that was one of the 
			reasons why it failed, but there was another and better one. if the judge 
			had stopped with bare assertion, it would have had a good deal of effect; 
			but he made the mistake of trying to prove his position. for some years 
			wilson had been privately at work on a whimsical almanac, for 
			his amusement—a calendar, with a little dab of ostensible 
			philosophy, usually in ironical form, appended to each date; and the judge 
			thought that these quips and fancies of wilson’s were neatly turned 
			and cute; so he carried a handful of them around, one day, and read them 
			to some of the chief citizens. but irony was not for those people; their 
			mental vision was not focussed for it. they read those playful trifles in 
			the solidest earnest, and decided without hesitancy that if there had ever 
			been any doubt that dave wilson was a pudd’nhead—which there 
			hadn’t—this revelation removed that doubt for good and all. 
			that is just the way in this world; an enemy can partly ruin a man, but 
			it takes a good-natured injudicious friend to complete the thing and 
			make it perfect. after this the judge felt tenderer than ever toward 
			wilson, and surer than ever that his calendar had merit.
 judge driscoll could be a free-thinker and still hold his place in 
			society because he was the person of most consequence in the community, 
			and therefore could venture to go 
			his own way and follow out his own notions. the other member 
			of his pet organization was allowed the like liberty
 because he was a cipher in the estimation of the public, and nobody
 attached any importance to what he thought or did. he was liked, he was
 welcome enough all around, but he simply didn’t count for anything.
 the widow cooper—affectionately called “aunt 
			patsy” by everybody—lived in a snug and comely cottage with 
			her daughter rowena, who was nineteen, romantic, amiable, and very 
			pretty, but otherwise of no consequence. rowena had a couple of young 
			brothers—also of no consequence.
 the widow had a large spare room which she let to a lodger, with board,
 when she could find one, but this room had been empty for a year now, to
 her sorrow. her income was only sufficient for the family support, and she
 needed the lodging-money for trifling luxuries. but now, at last, on a
 flaming june day, she found herself happy; her tedious wait was ended; her
 year-worn advertisement had been answered; and not by a 
			village applicant, oh, no!—this letter was from away off yonder in 
			the dim great world to the north: it was from st. louis. she sat on her 
		 porch gazing out with unseeing eyes upon the shining reaches of the 
			mighty mississippi, her thoughts steeped in her good fortune. indeed, it 
			was specially good fortune, for she was to have two lodgers instead of 
			one.
 she had read the letter to the family, and rowena had danced away to see
 to the cleaning and airing of the room by the slave woman nancy, and the
 boys had rushed abroad in the town to spread the great news, for it was 
 matter of public interest, and the public would wonder and not be pleased
 if not informed. presently rowena returned, all ablush with joyous
 excitement, and begged for a re-reading of the letter. it was framed thus:
honored madam: my brother and i have seen your 
			advertisement, by chance, and beg leave to take the room you offer. we 
			are twenty-four years of age and twins. we are italians by birth, but have 
			lived long in the various countries of europe, and several years in the 
			united states. our names are luigi and angelo capello. you desire but one 
			guest; but dear madam, if you will 
			allow us to pay for two, we will not incommode you. we shall be down 
			thursday.
 “italians! how romantic! just think, ma—there’s 
			never been one in this town, and everybody will be dying to see 
			them, and they’re all ours! think of 
			that!”
 “yes, i reckon they’ll make a grand stir.”
 “oh, indeed they will. the whole town will be on its head! 
			think—they’ve been in europe and everywhere! 
			there’s never been a traveler in this town before. 
			ma, i shouldn’t wonder if they’ve seen kings!”
 “well, a body can’t tell, but they’ll make stir 
			enough, without that.”
 “yes, that’s of course. luigi—angelo. 
			they’re lovely names; and so grand and foreign—not like 
			jones and robinson and such. thursday they are coming, and this is 
			only tuesday; it’s a cruel long time to wait. here comes judge 
			driscoll in at the gate. he’s heard about it. i’ll go and
 open the door.”
 the judge was full of congratulations and curiosity. the letter was read
 and discussed. soon justice robinson arrived with more 
			congratulations, and there was a new reading and a new discussion. this 
			was the beginning. neighbor after neighbor, of both sexes, followed, and 
			the procession drifted in and out all day and evening and all wednesday 
			and thursday. the letter was read and re-read until it was nearly worn 
			out; everybody admired its courtly and gracious tone, and smooth and 
			practised style, everybody was sympathetic and excited, and the coopers 
			were steeped in happiness all the while.
 the boats were very uncertain in low water, in these primitive times. this
 time the thursday boat had not arrived at ten at night—so the people
 had waited at the landing all day for nothing; they were driven to their
 homes by a heavy storm without having had a view of the illustrious
 foreigners.
 eleven o’clock came; and the cooper house was the only one in the 
			town that still had lights burning. the rain and thunder were booming 
			yet, and the anxious family were still waiting, still hoping. at last 
			there was a knock at the door and the family jumped to open it. two 
			negro men entered, 
			each carrying a trunk, and proceeded up-stairs toward the guest-room. 
			then entered the twins—the handsomest, the best dressed, the most 
			distinguished-looking pair of young fellows the west had ever seen. 
			one was a little fairer than the other, but otherwise they were exact 
			duplicates.
swimming in glory.
		 let us endeavor so to live that when we come to die even
 the undertaker will be sorry.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
 habit is habit, and not to be flung out of the window by any man, 
				but coaxed down-stairs a step at a time.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
at breakfast in the morning the twins’ 
			charm of manner and easy and polished bearing made speedy conquest of the 
			family’s good graces. 
			all constraint and formality quickly disappeared, and the friendliest 
			feeling succeeded. aunt patsy called them by their christian names almost 
			from the beginning. she was full of the keenest curiosity about them, and 
			showed it; they responded by talking about themselves, which pleased her 
			greatly. it presently appeared that in their early youth they had known 
			poverty and hardship. as the talk wandered along 
			the old lady watched for the right place to drop in a question or two 
			concerning that matter, and when she found it she said to the blond 
			twin who was now doing the biographies in his turn while the brunette
			one rested—
 “if it ain’t asking what i ought not to ask, mr. angelo, how 
			did you come to be so friendless and in such trouble when you were 
			little? do you mind telling? but don’t if you do.”
 “oh, we don’t mind it at all, madam; in our case it was 
			merely misfortune, and nobody’s fault. our parents were well to do, 
			there in italy, and we were their only child. we were of the old 
			florentine nobility”—rowena’s heart gave a great bound, 
			her nostrils expanded, and a fine light played in her 
			eyes—“and when the war broke out my father was on the 
			losing side and had to fly for his life. his estates were confiscated, his
 personal property seized, and there we were, in germany, strangers,
 friendless, and in fact paupers. my brother and i were ten years old, and
 well educated for that age, very studious, 
			very fond of our books, and
 well grounded in the german, french, spanish, and english languages. also,
 we were marvelous musical prodigies—if you will allow me to say it,
 it being only the truth.
 “our father survived his misfortunes only a month, our mother 
			soon followed him, and we were alone in the world. our parents could 
			have made themselves comfortable by exhibiting us as a show, and they 
			had many and large offers; but the thought revolted their pride, and 
			they said they would starve and die first. but what they wouldn’t 
			consent to do we had to do without the formality of consent. we were 
			seized for the debts occasioned by their illness and their funerals, 
			and placed among the attractions of a cheap museum in berlin to earn 
			the liquidation money. it took us two years to get out of that slavery. 
			we traveled all about germany receiving no wages, and not even our keep.
			we had to be exhibited for nothing, and beg our bread.
 “well, madam, the rest is not of much consequence. when we escaped 
			from that 
			slavery at twelve years of age, we were in some respects men.
 experience had taught us some valuable things; among others, how to take
 care of ourselves, how to avoid and defeat sharks and sharpers, and how to
 conduct our own business for our own profit and without other 
			people’s help. we traveled everywhere—years and 
			years—picking up smatterings of strange tongues, familiarizing 
			ourselves with strange sights and strange customs, accumulating an 
			education of a wide and varied and curious sort. it was a pleasant life. 
			we went to venice—to london, paris, russia, india, china, 
			japan—”
 at this point nancy the slave woman thrust her head in at the door and
 exclaimed:
 “ole missus, de house is plum’ jam full o’ people, en 
			dey’s jes a-spi’lin’ to see de gen’lmen!” 
			she indicated the twins with a nod of her head, and tucked it back out 
			of sight again.
 it was a proud occasion for the widow, and she promised herself high
 satisfaction in showing off her fine foreign birds before her neighbors
 and friends—simple folk who had hardly 
			ever seen a foreigner of any kind, and never one of any distinction or 
			style. yet her feeling was moderate indeed when contrasted with 
			rowena’s. rowena was in the clouds, she walked on air; this was to 
			be the greatest day, the most romantic episode, in the colorless history 
			of that dull country town. she was to be familiarly near the source of 
			its glory and feel the full flood of it pour over her and about her; the 
			other girls could only gaze and envy, not partake.
 the widow was ready, rowena was ready, so also were the foreigners.
 the party moved along the hall, the twins in advance, and entered the open
 parlor door, whence issued a low hum of conversation. the twins took a
 position near the 
			door, the widow stood at luigi’s side, rowena 
			stood beside angelo, and the march-past and the introductions began. the 
			widow was all smiles and contentment. she received the procession and 
			passed it on to rowena.
 “good mornin’, sister cooper”—hand-shake.
 “good morning, brother higgins—count 
			luigi capello, mr. higgins”—hand-shake, followed by a 
			devouring stare and “i’m glad to see ye,” on the 
			part of higgins, and a courteous inclination of the head and a 
			pleasant “most happy!” on the part of count luigi.
 “good mornin’, roweny”—hand-shake.
 “good morning, mr. higgins—present you to count angelo 
			capello.” hand-shake, admiring stare, “glad to see 
			ye,”—courteous nod, smily “most happy!” 
			and higgins passes on.
 none of these visitors was at ease, but, being honest people, they 
			didn’t pretend to be. none of them had ever seen a person 
			bearing a title of nobility before, and none had been expecting to 
			see one now, consequently the title came upon them as a kind of 
			pile-driving surprise and caught them unprepared. a few tried to 
			rise to the emergency, and got out an awkward “my 
			lord,” or “your lordship,” or something of that sort, 
			but the great majority were overwhelmed by the unaccustomed word 
			and its dim and awful associations with gilded courts and stately 
			ceremony and anointed kingship, so they only 
			fumbled through the hand-shake and passed on, speechless. now and then, 
			as happens at all receptions everywhere, a more than ordinary friendly 
			soul blocked the procession and kept it waiting while he inquired how 
			the brothers liked the village, and how long they were going to stay, 
			and if their families were well, and dragged in the weather, and hoped 
			it would get cooler soon, and all that sort of thing, so as to be able 
			to say, when they got home, “i had quite a long talk with 
			them”; but nobody did or said anything of a regrettable kind, 
			and so the great affair went through to the end in a creditable and 
			satisfactory fashion.
 general conversation followed, and the twins drifted about from group to
 group, talking easily and fluently and winning approval, compelling
 admiration and achieving favor from all. the widow followed their
 conquering march with a proud eye, and every now and then rowena said to
 herself with deep satisfaction, “and to think they are 
			ours—all ours!”
 there were no idle moments for mother or 
			daughter. eager inquiries concerning the twins were pouring into their 
			enchanted ears all the time; each was the constant center of a group of 
			breathless listeners; each recognized that she knew now for the first 
			time the real meaning of that great word glory, and perceived the 
			stupendous value of it, and understood why men in all ages had been 
			willing to throw away meaner happinesses, treasure, life itself, to get a 
			taste of its sublime and supreme joy. napoleon and all his kind stood 
			accounted for—and justified.
 when rowena had at last done all her duty by the people in the parlor, she
 went up-stairs to satisfy the longings of an overflow-meeting there, for
 the parlor was not big enough to hold all the comers. again she was
 besieged by eager questioners and again she swam in sunset seas of glory.
 when the forenoon was nearly gone, she recognized with a pang that this
 most splendid episode of her life was almost over, that nothing could
 prolong it, that nothing quite its equal could ever fall to her fortune
 again. but never mind, it was sufficient unto itself, the grand 
			occasion had moved on an ascending scale from the start, and was a noble 
			and memorable success. if the twins could but do some crowning act, now, 
			to climax it, something unusual, something startling, something to 
			concentrate upon themselves the company’s loftiest admiration, 
			something in the nature of an electric surprise—
 here a prodigious slam-banging broke out below, and everybody rushed down
 to see. it was the twins knocking out a classic four-handed piece on the
 piano, in great style. rowena was satisfied—satisfied down to the
 bottom of her heart.
 the young strangers were kept long at the piano. the villagers were
 astonished and enchanted with the magnificence of their performance, and
 could not bear to have them stop. all the music that they had ever heard
 before seemed spiritless prentice-work and barren of grace or charm when
 compared with these intoxicating floods of melodious sound. they realized
 that for once in their lives they were hearing masters.
the unknown nymph.
		 one of the most striking differences between a cat and a
 lie is that a cat has only nine lives.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
the company broke up reluctantly, and drifted 
			toward their several homes, chatting with vivacity, and all agreeing 
			that it would be many a long day before dawson’s landing would 
			see the equal of this one again. the twins had accepted several 
			invitations while the reception was in progress, and had also 
			volunteered to play some duets at an amateur entertainment for the 
			benefit of a local charity. society was eager to receive them to its 
			bosom. judge driscoll had the good fortune to secure them for an 
			immediate drive, and to be the first to display them in public. they 
			entered his buggy with him, and were paraded down the main street, 
			everybody flocking to the windows and sidewalks to see.
 the judge showed the strangers the new graveyard, and the jail, and where
 the richest man lived, and the freemasons’ hall, and the 
			methodist church, and the presbyterian church, and where the baptist 
			church was going to be when they got some money to build it with, and 
			showed them the town hall and the slaughter-house, and got out the 
			independent fire company in uniform and had them put out an imaginary 
			fire; then he let them inspect the muskets of the militia company, and 
			poured out an exhaustless stream of enthusiasm over all these splendors, 
			and seemed very well satisfied with the responses he got, for the twins 
			admired his admiration, and paid him back the best they could, though 
			they could have done better if some fifteen or sixteen hundred thousand 
			previous experiences of this sort in various countries had not already 
			rubbed off a considerable part of the novelty of it.
 the judge laid himself out hospitably to make them have a good time, and
 if there 
			was a defect anywhere it was not his 
			fault.
			he told them a good
 many humorous anecdotes, and always forgot the nub, but they were always
 able to furnish it, for these yarns were of a pretty early vintage, and
 they had had many a rejuvenating pull at them before. and he told them all
 about his several dignities, and how he had held this and that and the
 other place of honor or profit, and had once been to the legislature, and
 was now president of the society of free-thinkers. he said the society had
 been in existence four 
			years, and already had two members, and was firmly established. he would 
			call for the brothers in the evening if they would like to attend a 
			meeting of it.
 accordingly he called for them, and on the way he told them all about
 pudd’nhead wilson, in order that they might get a favorable 
			impression of him in advance and be prepared to like him. this scheme 
			succeeded—the favorable impression was achieved. later it was 
			confirmed and solidified when wilson proposed that out of courtesy to 
			the strangers the usual topics be put aside and the hour be 
			devoted to conversation upon ordinary subjects and the cultivation of 
			friendly relations and good-fellowship,—a proposition which was 
			put to vote and carried.
 the hour passed quickly away in lively talk, and when it was ended the
 lonesome and neglected wilson was richer by two friends than he had been
 when it began. he invited the twins to look in at his lodgings, presently,
 after disposing of an intervening engagement, and they accepted with
 pleasure.
 toward the middle of the evening they found themselves on the road to his
 house. pudd’nhead was at home waiting for them and putting in his 
			time puzzling over a thing which had come under his notice that morning. 
			the matter was this: he happened to be up very early—at dawn, in 
			fact; and he crossed the hall which divided his cottage through the 
			center, and entered a room to get something there. the window of the 
			room had no curtains, for that side of the house had long been unoccupied, 
			and through this window he caught sight of something which surprised and 
			interested him. it was a 
			young woman—a young woman where properly 
			no young woman belonged; for she was in judge driscoll’s house, and 
			in the bedroom over the judge’s private study or sitting-room. 
			this was young tom driscoll’s bedroom. he and the judge, the 
			judge’s widowed sister mrs. pratt and three negro servants were 
			the only people who belonged in the house. who, then, might this young 
			lady be? the two houses were separated by an ordinary yard, with a low 
			fence running back through its middle from the street in front to the 
			lane in the rear. the distance was not great, and wilson was able to see 
			the girl very well, the window-shades of the room she was in being up, 
			and the window also. the girl had on a neat and trim summer dress, 
			patterned in broad stripes of pink and white, and her bonnet was equipped 
			with a pink veil. she was practising steps, gaits and attitudes, 
			apparently; she was doing the thing gracefully, and was very much absorbed 
			in her work. who could she be, and how came she to be in
 young tom driscoll’s room?
 wilson had quickly chosen a position from which he could watch the girl
 without running much risk of being seen by her, and he remained there
 hoping she would raise her veil and betray her face. but she disappointed
 him. after a matter of twenty minutes she disappeared, and although he
 stayed at his post half an hour longer, she came no more.
 toward noon he dropped in at the judge’s and talked with mrs. 
			pratt about the great event of the day, the levee of the distinguished 
			foreigners at aunt patsy cooper’s. he asked after her nephew tom, 
			and she said he was on his way home, and that she was expecting him to 
			arrive a little before night; and added that she and the judge were 
			gratified to gather from his letters that he was conducting himself 
			very nicely and creditably—at which wilson winked to himself 
			privately. wilson did not ask if there was a newcomer in the house, 
			but he asked questions that would have brought light-throwing answers 
			as to that matter if mrs. pratt had had any light to throw; so he went
			away satisfied that he knew of things that were going
 on in her house of which she herself was not aware.
 he was now waiting for the twins, and still puzzling over the problem of
 who that girl might be, and how she happened to be in that young 
			fellow’s room at daybreak in the morning.
marse tom tramples his chance.
		 the holy passion of friendship is of so sweet and steady
 and loyal and enduring a nature that it will last through a
 whole lifetime, if not asked to lend money.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
 consider well the proportions of things. it is better to be
 a young june-bug than an old bird of paradise.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
it is necessary now, to hunt up roxy.
 at the time she was set free and went away chambermaiding, she was 
			thirty-five. she got a berth as second chambermaid on a cincinnati boat 
			in the new orleans trade, the grand mogul. a couple of trips made 
			her wonted and easy-going at the work, and infatuated her with the stir
 and adventure and independence of steamboat life. then she was promoted
 and became head chambermaid. she was a favorite with the officers, and
 exceedingly proud of their joking and friendly way with her.
 during eight years she served three parts of the year on that boat, and
 the winters on a vicksburg packet. but now for two months she had had
 rheumatism in her arms, and was obliged to let the wash-tub alone. so she
 resigned. but she was well fixed—rich, as she would have described
 it; for she had lived a steady life, and had banked four dollars every
 month in new 
			orleans as a provision for her old age. she said in the start
 that she had “put shoes on one bar’footed nigger to tromple 
			on her with,” and that one mistake like that was enough; she 
			would be independent of the human race thenceforth forevermore if hard 
			work and economy could accomplish it. when the boat touched the levee at 
			new orleans she bade good-by to her comrades on the grand mogul 
			and moved her kit ashore.
 but she was back in a hour. the bank had gone to smash and carried her
 four hundred dollars with it. she was a pauper, and homeless. also disabled
 bodily, at least for the present. the officers were full of sympathy for
 her in her trouble, and made up a little purse for her. she resolved to go
 to her birthplace; 
			she had friends there among the negroes, and the
 unfortunate always help the unfortunate, she was well aware of that; those
 lowly comrades of her youth would not let her starve.
 she took the little local packet at cairo, and now she was on the
 home-stretch. time had worn away her bitterness against her son, and she
 was able to think of him with serenity. she put the vile side of him out
 of her mind, and dwelt only on recollections of his occasional acts of
 kindness to her. she gilded and otherwise decorated these, and made them
 very pleasant to contemplate. she began to long to see him. she would go
 and fawn upon him, slave-like—for this would have to be her attitude,
 of course—and maybe she would find that time had modified him, and
 that he would be glad to see his long-forgotten old nurse and treat her
 gently. that would be lovely; that would make her forget her woes and her
 poverty.
 her poverty! that thought inspired her to add another castle to her dream:
 maybe he would give her a trifle now and then—maybe 
			a dollar, once a month, say; any little thing like that would help, oh, 
			ever so much.
 by the time she reached dawson’s landing she was her old self 
			again; her blues were gone, she was in high feather. she would get along, 
			surely; there were many kitchens where the servants would share their 
			meals with her, and also steal sugar and apples and other dainties for 
			her to carry home—or give her a chance to pilfer them herself, 
			which would answer just as well. and there was the church. she was a 
			more rabid and devoted methodist than ever, and her piety was no sham, 
			but was strong and sincere. yes, with plenty of creature comforts and 
			her old place in the amen-corner in her possession again, she would be 
			perfectly happy and at peace thenceforward to the end.
 she went to judge driscoll’s kitchen first of all. she was received 
			there in great form and with vast enthusiasm. her wonderful travels, and 
			the strange countries she had seen and the adventures she had had, made 
			her a marvel, and a heroine of romance. the negroes hung enchanted upon 
			the great story of her experiences, interrupting her all along with eager
			questions, with laughter, exclamations of delight and expressions of 
			applause; and she was obliged to confess to herself that if there was 
			anything better in this world 
			than steamboating, it was the glory to be got by telling about it. 
			the audience loaded her stomach with their dinners, and then stole 
			the pantry bare to load up her basket.
 tom was in st. louis. the servants said he had spent the best part of his
 time there during the previous two years. roxy came every day, and had
 many talks about the family and its affairs. once she asked why tom was
 away so much. the ostensible “chambers” said:
 “de fac’ is, ole marster kin git along better when young 
			marster’s away den he kin when he’s in de town; yes, 
			en he love him better, too; so he gives him fifty dollahs a 
			month—”
 “no, is dat so? chambers, you’s a-jokin’, 
			ain’t you?”
 “’clah to goodness i ain’t, mammy; 
			marse tom tole me so his own self. but
 nemmine, ’tain’t enough.”
 “my lan’, what de reason ’tain’t enough?”
 “well, i’s gwine to tell you, if you gimme a chanst, 
			mammy. de reason it ain’t enough is ’ca’se 
			marse tom gambles.”
 roxy threw up her hands in astonishment and chambers went on—
 “ole marster found it out, ’ca’se he had to pay two 
			hundred dollahs for marse tom’s gamblin’ debts, en 
			dat’s true, mammy, jes as dead certain as
 you’s bawn.”
 “two—hund’d—dollahs! why, what is you 
			talkin’ ’bout? two—hund’d—dollahs.
 sakes alive, it’s ’mos’ enough to buy a 
			tol’able good second-hand nigger wid. en you ain’t 
			lyin’, honey?—you wouldn’t lie to yo’ 
			ole mammy?”
 “it’s god’s own truth, jes as i tell you—two 
			hund’d dollahs—i wisht i may never stir outen my tracks 
			if it ain’t so. en, oh, my lan’, ole marse was jes 
			a-hoppin’! he was b’ilin’ mad, i tell you! 
			he tuck ’n’ dissenhurrit him.”
		 he licked his chops with relish after that stately word. roxy struggled 
			with it a moment, then gave it up and said—
 “dissenwhiched him?”
 “dissenhurrit him.”
 “what’s dat? what do it mean?”
 “means he bu’sted de will.”
 “bu’s—ted de will! he wouldn’t 
			ever treat him so! take it back, you mis’able 
			imitation nigger dat i bore in sorrow en tribbilation.”
 roxy’s pet castle—an occasional dollar from tom’s 
			pocket—was tumbling to ruin before her eyes. she could not 
			abide such a disaster as that; she couldn’t endure the thought 
			of it. her remark amused chambers:
 “yah-yah-yah! jes listen to dat! if i’s imitation, 
			what is you? bofe of us is imitation white—dat’s 
			what we is—en pow’ful good imitation, 
			too—yah-yah-yah!—we don’t ’mount to noth’n 
			as imitation niggers; en as for—”
 “shet up yo’ foolin’, ’fo’ i knock you side 
			de head, en tell me ’bout de will. tell me ’tain’t 
			bu’sted—do, honey, en i’ll never forgit you.”
 “well, ’tain’t—’ca’se 
			dey’s a new one made, en marse tom’s all right ag’in.
			but what is 
			you in sich a sweat ’bout it for, mammy?
 ’tain’t none o’ your business i don’t 
			reckon.”
 “’tain’t none o’ my business? whose 
			business is it den, i’d like to know?
 wuz i his mother tell he was fifteen years old, or wusn’t 
			i?—you answer me dat. en you speck i could see him turned 
			out po’ en ornery on de worl’ en never care 
			noth’n’ ’bout it? i reckon if you’d 
			ever be’n a mother yo’self, valet de chambers, you 
			wouldn’t talk sich foolishness as dat.”
 “well, den, ole marse forgive him en fixed up de will 
			ag’in—do dat satisfy you?”
 yes, she was satisfied now, and quite happy and sentimental over it. she
 kept coming daily, and at last she was told that tom had come home. she
 began to tremble with emotion, and straightway sent to beg him to let his
 “po’ ole nigger mammy have jes one sight of him 
			en die for joy.”
 tom was stretched at his lazy ease on a sofa when chambers brought the
 petition. time had not modified his ancient detestation of the humble
 drudge and protector of his boyhood; it was still bitter and
 uncompromising. 
			he sat up and bent a severe gaze upon the fair face of the
 young fellow whose name he was unconsciously using and whose family rights
 he was enjoying. he maintained the gaze until the victim of it had become
 satisfactorily pallid with terror, then he said—
 “what does the old rip want with me?”
 the petition was meekly repeated.
 “who gave you permission to come and disturb me with the 
			social attentions of niggers?”
 tom had risen. the other young man was trembling now, visibly. he saw what
 was coming, and bent his head sideways, and put up his left arm to shield
 it. tom rained cuffs upon the head and its shield, saying no word: the
 victim received each blow with a beseeching, “please, 
			marse tom!—oh, please, marse tom!” seven blows—then 
			tom said, “face the door—march!” he followed behind with 
			one, two, three solid kicks. the last one helped the pure-white slave 
			over the door-sill, and he limped away mopping his 
			eyes with his old 
			ragged sleeve. tom shouted after him, “send her in!”
 then he flung himself panting on the sofa again, and rasped out the
 remark, “he arrived just at the right moment; i was full to 
			the brim with bitter thinkings, and nobody to take it out of. 
			how refreshing it was! i feel better.”
 tom’s mother entered now, closing the door behind her, and 
			approached her son with all the wheedling and supplicating servilities 
			that fear and interest can impart to the words and attitudes of the born 
			slave. she stopped a yard from her boy and made two or three admiring 
			exclamations over his manly stature and general handsomeness, and tom 
			put an arm under his head and hoisted a leg over the sofa-back in order 
			to look properly indifferent.
 “my lan’, how you is growed, honey! ’clah to goodness, 
			i wouldn’t a-knowed you, marse tom! ’deed i wouldn’t! 
			look at me good; does you ’member old roxy?—does you know 
			yo’ old nigger mammy, honey? well, now, i kin lay down en die in 
			peace, ’ca’se i’se seed—”
 “cut it short, ——— it, cut it short! 
			what is it you want?”
 “you heah dat? jes the same old marse tom, al’ays so gay 
			and funnin’ wid de ole mammy. i ’uz jes as shore—”
 “cut it short, i tell you, and get along! what do you want?”
 this was a bitter disappointment. roxy had for so many days nourished and
 fondled and petted her notion that tom would be glad to see his old nurse,
 and would make her proud and happy to the marrow with a cordial word or
 two, that it took two rebuffs to convince her that he was not funning, and
 that her beautiful dream was a fond and foolish vanity, a shabby and
 pitiful mistake. she was hurt to the heart, and so ashamed that for a
 moment she did not quite know what to do or how to act. then her breast
 began to heave, the tears came, and in her forlornness she was moved to
 try that other dream of hers—an appeal to her boy’s charity; 
			and so, upon the impulse, and without reflection, she offered her 
			supplication:
 “oh, marse tom, de po’ ole mammy is in 
			sich hard luck dese days; en she’s kinder crippled in de arms en 
			can’t work, en if you could gimme a dollah—on’y jes one 
			little dol—”
 tom was on his feet so suddenly that the supplicant was startled into a
 jump herself.
 “a dollar!—give you a dollar! i’ve a notion to 
			strangle you! is that your errand here? clear out! and be 
			quick about it!”
 roxy backed slowly toward the door. when she was half-way she stopped, 
			and said mournfully:
 “marse tom, i nussed you when you was a little baby, en i 
			raised you all by myself tell you was ’most a young man; en now 
			you is young en rich, en i is po’ en gitt’n ole, en i come 
			heah b’lievin’ dat you would he’p de ole mammy 
			’long down de little road dat’s lef’ ’twix’ 
			her en de grave, en—”
 tom relished this tune less than any that had preceded it, for it began
 to wake up a sort of echo in his conscience; so he interrupted and said
 with decision, though without asperity, that he was not in a situation to
 help her, and wasn’t going to do it.
 “ain’t you ever gwine to he’p me, marse tom?”
 “no! now go away and don’t bother me any more.”
 roxy’s head was down, in an attitude of humility. but now the 
			fires of her old wrongs flamed up in her breast and began to burn 
			fiercely. she raised her head slowly, till it was well up, and at the 
			same time her great frame unconsciously assumed an erect and masterful 
			attitude, with all the majesty and grace of her vanished youth in it. 
			she raised her finger and punctuated with it:
 “you has said de word. you has had yo’ chance, en you has 
			trompled it under yo’ foot. when you git another one, you’ll 
			git down on yo’ knees en beg for it!”
 a cold chill went to tom’s heart, he didn’t know why; 
			for he did not reflect that such words, from such an incongruous 
			source, and so solemnly delivered, could not easily fail of that 
			effect. however, he did the natural thing: he replied with bluster 
			and mockery:
 “you’ll give me a chance—you! 
			perhaps i’d better get down on my knees now! but 
			in case i don’t—just for argument’s 
			sake—what’s going to happen, pray?”
 “dis is what is gwine to happen. i’s gwine as straight to 
			yo’ uncle as i kin walk, en tell him every las’ 
			thing i knows ’bout you.”
 tom’s cheek blenched, and she saw it. disturbing thoughts began 
			to chase each other through his head. “how can she know? and yet 
			she must have found out—she looks it. i’ve had the will back 
			only three months, and am already deep in debt again, and moving heaven 
			and earth to save myself from exposure and destruction, with a reasonably 
			fair show of getting the thing covered up if i’m let alone, and 
			now this fiend has gone and found me out somehow or other. i wonder how 
			much she knows? oh, oh, oh, it’s enough to break a body’s 
			heart! but i’ve got to humor her—there’s
 no other way.”
 then he worked up a rather sickly sample of a gay laugh and a hollow
 chipperness of manner, and said:
 “well, well, roxy dear, old friends like 
			you and me mustn’t quarrel. here’s your dollar—now 
			tell me what you know.”
 he held out the wild-cat bill; she stood as she was, and made no movement.
 it was her turn to scorn persuasive foolery, now, and she did not waste 
			it. she said, with a grim implacability in voice and manner which made tom
 almost realize that even a former slave can remember for ten minutes
 insults and injuries returned for compliments and flatteries received, and
 can also enjoy taking revenge for them when the opportunity offers:
 “what does i know? i’ll tell you what i knows. i knows enough 
			to bu’st dat will to flinders—en more, mind you, 
			more!”
 tom was aghast.
 “more?” he said. “what do you call more? 
			where’s there any room for more?”
 roxy laughed a mocking laugh, and said scoffingly, with a toss of her
 head, and her hands on her hips—
 “yes!—oh, i reckon! co’se you’d like 
			to know—wid yo’ po’ little ole rag dollah. what you 
			reckon i’s gwine to tell you for?—you ain’t 
			got no money. i’s gwine to tell yo’ 
			uncle—en i’ll do it dis minute, too—he’ll 
			gimme five dollahs for de news, en mighty glad, too.”
 she swung herself around disdainfully, and started away. tom was in a
 panic. he seized her skirts, and implored her to wait. she turned and
 said, loftily—
 “look-a-heah, what ’uz it i tole you?”
 “you—you—i don’t remember anything. 
			what was it you told me?”
 “i tole you dat de next time i give you a chance you’d git 
			down on yo’ knees en beg for it.”
 tom was stupefied for a moment. he was panting with excitement. then he
 said:
 “oh, roxy, you wouldn’t require your young master to do 
			such a horrible thing. you can’t mean it.”
 “i’ll let you know mighty quick whether i means it or not! 
			you call me names, en as good as spit on me when i comes here po’ 
			en ornery en ’umble, to praise you for bein’ growed up so 
			fine en handsome, en tell you how i used to nuss you en tend you en 
			watch you when you ’uz sick en hadn’t no mother 
			but me in de whole worl’, en beg you to give de po’ ole 
			nigger a dollah for to git her som’n’ to eat, en you call 
			me names—names, dad blame you! yassir, i gives you jes 
			one chance mo’, and dat’s now, en it las’ 
			on’y a half a second—you hear?”
 tom slumped to his knees and began to beg, saying—
 “you see, i’m begging, and it’s honest begging, too! 
			now tell me, roxy, tell me.”
 the heir of two centuries of unatoned insult and outrage looked down on
 him and seemed to drink in deep draughts of satisfaction. then she 
			said—
 “fine nice young white gen’l’man kneelin’ down 
			to a nigger-wench! i’s wanted to see dat jes once befo’ 
			i’s called. now, gabr’el, blow de hawn, i’s 
			ready … git up!”
 tom did it. he said, humbly—
 “now, roxy, don’t punish me any more. i deserved what 
			i’ve got, but be good and let me off with that. don’t go 
			to uncle. tell me—i’ll give you the five dollars.”
 “yes, i bet you will; en you won’t stop dah, nuther. 
			but i ain’t gwine to tell you heah—”
 “good gracious, no!”
 “is you ’feared o’ de ha’nted 
			house?”
 “n-no.”
 “well, den, you come to de ha’nted house ’bout ten 
			or ’leven to-night, en climb up de ladder, ’ca’se de 
			sta’r-steps is broke down, en you’ll find me. i’s 
			a-roostin’ in de ha’nted house ’ca’se i 
			can’t ’ford to roos’ nowhers’ else.” 
			she started toward the door, but stopped and said, “gimme 
			de dollah bill!” he gave it to her. she examined it and said, 
			“h’m—like enough de bank’s 
			bu’sted.” she started again, but halted again. 
			“has you got any whisky?”
 “yes, a little.”
 “fetch it!”
 he ran to his room overhead and brought down a bottle which was two-thirds
 full. she tilted it up and took a drink. her eyes sparkled with
 satisfaction, and she tucked the bottle under her shawl, saying, 
			“it’s prime. i’ll take it along.”
 tom humbly held the door for her, and she marched out as grim and erect as
 a grenadier.
tom practises sycophancy.
		 why is it that we rejoice at a birth and grieve at a
 funeral? it is because we are not the person 
		 involved.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
 it is easy to find fault, if one has that disposition.
 there was once a man who, not being able to find any other
 fault with his coal, complained that there were too many
 prehistoric toads in it.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
tom flung himself on the sofa, and put his 
			throbbing head in his hands, and rested his elbows on his knees. he 
			rocked himself back and forth and moaned.
 “i’ve knelt to a nigger wench!” he muttered. 
			“i thought i had struck the deepest depths of degradation before, 
			but oh, dear, it was nothing to this.… well, there is one 
			consolation, such as it is—i’ve struck bottom this time; 
			there’s nothing lower.”
 but that was a hasty conclusion.
 at ten that night he climbed the ladder in 
			the haunted house, pale, weak and wretched. roxy was standing in the 
			door of one of the rooms, waiting, for she had heard him.
 this was a two-story log house which had acquired the reputation a few
 years before of being haunted, and that was the end of its usefulness. 
			nobody would live in it afterward, or go near it by night, and most 
			people even gave it a wide berth in the daytime. as it had no competition, 
			it was called the haunted house. it was getting crazy and ruinous, 
			now, from long neglect. it stood three hundred yards beyond 
			pudd’nhead wilson’s house, with nothing between but vacancy. 
			it was the last house in the town at that end.
 tom followed roxy into the room. she had a pile of clean straw in the
 corner for a bed, some cheap but well-kept clothing was hanging on the
 wall, there was a tin lantern freckling the floor with little spots of
 light, and there were various soap-and-candle boxes scattered about, 
			which served for chairs. the two sat down. roxy said—
 “now den, i’ll tell you straight off, en i’ll begin 
			to k’leck de money later on; i ain’t in 
			no hurry. what does you reckon i’s gwine to tell you?”
 “well, you—you—oh, roxy, don’t make it too hard 
			for me! come right out and tell me you’ve found out somehow what 
			a shape i’m in on account of dissipation and foolishness.”
 “disposition en foolishness! no sir, dat ain’t it. 
			dat jist ain’t nothin’ at all, ’longside o’ 
			what i knows.”
 tom stared at her, and said—
 “why, roxy, what do you mean?”
 she rose, and gloomed above him like a fate.
 “i means dis—en it’s de lord’s truth. you 
			ain’t no more kin to ole marse driscoll den i 
			is!—dat’s what i means!” and her eyes 
			flamed with triumph.
 “what!”
 “yassir, en dat ain’t all! you’s a 
			nigger!—bawn a nigger en a 
			slave!—en you’s a nigger en a slave dis
			minute; en if i opens my mouf ole marse driscoll’ll sell 
			you down de river befo’ you is two days older den what 
			you is now!”
 “it’s a thundering lie, you miserable old blatherskite!”
 “it ain’t no lie, nuther. it’s jes de truth, en 
			nothin’ but de truth, so he’p me. 
			yassir—you’s my son—”
 “you devil!”
 “en dat po’ boy dat you’s be’n a-kickin’ en 
			a-cuffin’ to-day is percy driscoll’s son en yo’
			marster—”
 “you beast!”
 “en his name’s tom driscoll, en yo’ 
			name’s valet de chambers, en you ain’t got no fambly 
			name, beca’se niggers don’t have em!”
 tom sprang up and seized a billet of wood and 
			raised it; but his mother only laughed at him, and said—
 “set down, you pup! does you think you kin skyer me? it ain’t 
			in you, nor de likes of you. i reckon you’d shoot me in de back, 
			maybe, if you got a chance, for dat’s jist yo’ 
			style—i knows you, throo en throo—but i don’t 
			mind gitt’n killed, beca’se all dis is down in writin’ 
			en it’s in safe hands, too, en de man dat’s got it knows 
			whah to look for de right man when i gits killed. oh, bless 
			yo’ soul, if you puts yo’ mother up for as big a fool as 
			you is, you’s pow’ful mistaken, i kin tell you!
 now den, you set still en behave yo’self; en don’t you git 
			up ag’in till i tell you!”
 tom fretted and chafed awhile in a whirlwind of disorganizing sensations
 and emotions, and finally said, with something like settled 
			conviction—
 “the whole thing is moonshine; now then, go ahead and do your worst; 
			i’m done with you.”
 roxy made no answer. she took the lantern and started toward the door. 
			tom was in a cold panic in a moment.
 “come back, come back!” he wailed. “i didn’t mean 
			it, roxy; i take it all back, and i’ll never say it again! 
			please come back, roxy!”
 the woman stood a moment, then she said gravely:
 “dat’s one thing you’s got to stop, valet de chambers. 
			you can’t call me roxy, same as if you was my equal. 
			chillen don’t speak to dey mammies like dat. you’ll call me ma 
			or mammy, dat’s what you’ll call me—leastways when dey 
			ain’t nobody aroun’. say it!”
 it cost tom a struggle, but he got it out.
 “dat’s all right. don’t you ever forgit it ag’in, 
			if you knows what’s good for you. now den, you has said you 
			wouldn’t ever call it lies en moonshine ag’in. i’ll 
			tell you dis, for a warnin’: if you ever does say it ag’in,
 it’s de las’ time you’ll ever say it to me; 
			i’ll tramp as straight to de judge as i kin walk, en tell him 
			who you is, en prove it. does you b’lieve me when i 
			says dat?”
 “oh,” groaned tom, “i more than believe it; 
			i know it.”
 roxy knew her conquest was complete. she could have proved nothing to
 anybody, and her threat about the writings was a lie; but she knew the 
			person she was dealing with, and had made both statements without any 
			doubt as to the effect they would produce.
 she went and sat down on her candle-box, and the pride and pomp of her
 victorious attitude made it a throne. she said—
 “now den, chambers, we’s gwine to talk 
			business, en dey ain’t gwine to be no mo’ foolishness. in de 
			fust place, you gits fifty dollahs a month; you’s gwine to 
			han’ over half of it to yo’ ma. plank it out!”
 but tom had only six dollars in the world. he gave her that, and promised
 to start fair on next month’s pension.
 “chambers, how much is you in debt?”
 tom shuddered, and said—
 “nearly three hundred dollars.”
 “how is you gwine to pay it?”
 tom groaned out—“oh, i don’t know; don’t ask me 
			such awful questions.”
 but she stuck to her point until she wearied a confession out of him: he
 had been prowling about in disguise, stealing small valuables from private
 houses; in fact, he made a good deal of a raid on his fellow-villagers a
 fortnight before, when he was supposed to be in st. louis; but he doubted
 if he had sent away enough stuff to realize the required amount, and was
 afraid to make a further venture in the present excited state of the town.
 his mother approved of his conduct, and offered 
			to help, but this frightened him. he tremblingly ventured to say that if 
			she would retire from the town he should feel better and safer, and could 
			hold his head higher—and was going on to make an argument, but she 
			interrupted and surprised him pleasantly by saying she was ready; it 
			didn’t make any difference to her where she stayed, so that 
			she got her share of the pension regularly. she said she would not go 
			far, and would call at the haunted house once a month for her money. 
			then she said—
 “i don’t hate you so much now, but i’ve hated you a 
			many a year—and anybody would. didn’t i change you off, en 
			give you a good fambly en a good name, en made you a white 
			gen’l’man en rich, wid store clothes on—en
 what did i git for it? you despised me all de time, en was al’ays 
			sayin’ mean hard things to me befo’ folks, en wouldn’t 
			ever let me forgit i’s a 
			nigger—en—en———”
 she fell to sobbing, and broke down. tom said—“but you 
			know i didn’t know you were my mother; and besides—”
 “well, nemmine ’bout dat, now; let it go. i’s gwine 
			to fo’git it.” then she added fiercely, “en 
			don’t ever make me remember it ag’in, or you’ll be
 sorry, i tell you.”
 when they were parting, tom said, in the most persuasive way he could
 command—
 “ma, would you mind telling me who was my father?”
 he had supposed he was asking an embarrassing question. he was mistaken.
 roxy drew herself up with a proud toss of her head, and said—
 “does i mine tellin’ you? no, dat i don’t! 
			you ain’t got no ’casion to be shame’ 
			o’ yo’ father, i kin tell you. he wuz de highest 
			quality in dis whole town—ole virginny stock. fust famblies, he 
			wuz. jes as good stock as de driscolls en de howards, de bes’ day 
			dey ever seed.” she put on a little prouder air, if possible, and 
			added impressively: “does you ’member cunnel cecil burleigh 
			essex, dat died de same year yo’ young marse tom driscoll’s 
			pappy died, en all de masons en odd fellers en churches 
			turned out en give him de bigges’ funeral dis town ever seed?
 dat’s de man.”
 under the inspiration of her soaring complacency the departed graces of
 her earlier days returned to her, and her bearing took to itself a dignity
 and state that might have passed for queenly if her surroundings had been
 a little more in keeping with it.
 “dey ain’t another nigger in dis town dat’s as 
			high-bawn as you is. now den, go ’long! en jes you hold 
			yo’ head up as high as you want to—you
 has de right, en dat i kin swah.”
the nymph revealed.
		 all say, “how hard it is that we have to die”—a strange
 complaint to come from the mouths of people who have had to
 live.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
 when angry, count four; when very angry, swear.—pudd’nhead 
		 wilson’s calendar.
every now and then, after tom went to bed, 
			he had sudden wakings out of his sleep, and his first thought was, 
			“oh, joy, it was all a dream!” then he laid himself heavily 
			down again, with a groan and the muttered words,
 “a nigger! i am a nigger! oh, i wish i was dead!”
 he woke at dawn with one more repetition of this horror, and then he
 resolved to meddle no more with that treacherous sleep. he began to think.
 sufficiently bitter thinkings they were. they wandered along something
 after this fashion:
 “why were niggers and whites made? what crime did the 
			uncreated first nigger commit that the curse of birth was decreed for him? 
			and why is this awful difference made between white and black? … 
			how hard the nigger’s fate seems, this morning!—yet until last 
			night such a thought never entered my head.”
 he sighed and groaned an hour or more away. then “chambers” 
			came humbly in to say that breakfast was nearly ready. “tom” 
			blushed scarlet to see this aristocratic white youth cringe to him, a 
			nigger, and call him “young marster.” he said roughly—
 “get out of my sight!” and when the youth was gone, 
			he muttered, “he has done me no harm, poor wretch, but he is 
			an eyesore to me now, for he is driscoll the young gentleman, 
			and i am a—oh, i wish i was dead!”
 a gigantic irruption, like that of krakatoa a few years ago, with the
 accompanying earthquakes, tidal waves, and clouds of volcanic dust,
 changes the face of the surrounding landscape beyond recognition, bringing
 down the high lands, elevating the low, making fair 
			lakes where deserts had been, and deserts where green prairies had smiled 
			before. the tremendous catastrophe which had befallen tom had changed his 
			moral landscape in much the same way. some of his low places he found 
			lifted to ideals, some of his ideals had sunk to the valleys, and lay 
			there with the sackcloth and ashes of pumice-stone and sulphur on their 
			ruined heads.
 for days he wandered in lonely places, thinking, thinking, 
			thinking—trying to get his bearings. it was new work. if he met a 
			friend, he found that the habit of a lifetime had in some mysterious way 
			vanished—his arm hung limp, instead of involuntarily extending the 
			hand for a shake. it was the “nigger” 
			in him asserting its humility, and he blushed and was abashed. and the 
			“nigger” in him was surprised when the white friend put out 
			his hand for a shake with him. he found the “nigger” in him 
			involuntarily giving the road, on the sidewalk, to a white rowdy and 
			loafer. when rowena, the dearest thing his heart knew, the idol of his 
			secret worship, invited him in, the “nigger” 
			in him made an embarrassed excuse and was afraid to enter and sit with 
			the dread white folks on equal terms. the “nigger” in him 
			went shrinking and skulking here and there and yonder, and fancying it 
			saw suspicion and maybe detection in all faces, tones, and gestures. 
			so strange and uncharacteristic was tom’s conduct that people 
			noticed it, and turned to look after him when he passed on; and when 
			he glanced back—as he could not help doing, in spite of his best 
			resistance—and caught that puzzled expression in a person’s 
			face, it gave him a sick feeling, and he took himself out of view as 
			quickly as he could. he presently came to have a hunted sense and a 
			hunted look, and then he fled away to the hill-tops and the solitudes. 
			he said to himself that the curse of ham was upon him.
 he dreaded his meals; the “nigger” in him was ashamed 
			to sit at the white folks’ table, and feared discovery all the 
			time; and once when judge driscoll said, “what’s 
			the matter with you? you look as meek as a nigger,”
 he felt as secret murderers are said to feel 
			when the accuser says, “thou art the man!” tom said he was 
			not well, and left the table.
 his ostensible “aunt’s” solicitudes and endearments 
			were become a terror to him, and he avoided them.
 and all the time, hatred of his ostensible “uncle” 
			was steadily growing in his heart; for he said to himself, 
			“he is white; and i am his chattel, his property, his goods, 
			and he can sell me, just as he could his dog.”
 for as much as a week after this, tom imagined that his character had
 undergone a pretty radical change. but that was because he did not know
 himself.
 in several ways his opinions were totally changed, and would never go back
 to what they were before, but the main structure of his character was not
 changed, and could not be changed. one or two very important features of
 it were altered, and in time effects would result from this, if
 opportunity offered—effects of a quite serious nature, too. under
 the influence of a great mental and moral upheaval his character and
 habits had taken on the appearance of complete change, 
			but after a while with the subsidence of the storm both began to settle 
			toward their former places. he dropped gradually back into his old 
			frivolous and easy-going ways and conditions of feeling and manner of 
			speech, and no familiar of his could have detected anything in him that 
			differentiated him from the weak and careless tom of other days.
 the theft-raid which he had made upon the village turned out better than
 he had ventured to hope. it produced the sum necessary to pay his 
			gaming-debts, and saved him from exposure to his uncle and another 
			smashing of the will. he and his mother learned to like each other fairly 
			well. she couldn’t love him, as yet, because there 
			“warn’t nothing to him,” as she expressed it, 
			but her nature needed something or somebody to rule over, and he was 
			better than nothing. her strong character and aggressive and commanding 
			ways compelled tom’s admiration in spite of the fact that he got 
			more illustrations of them than he needed for his comfort. however, as a 
			rule her conversation was made up of racy tattle about the privacies of 
			the chief 
			families of the town (for she went harvesting among their kitchens every 
			time she came to the village), and tom enjoyed this. it was just in his 
			line. she always collected her half of his pension punctually, and he was 
			always at the haunted house to have a chat with her on these occasions. 
			every now and then she paid him a visit there on between-days also.
 occasionally he would run up to st. louis for a few weeks, and at last
 temptation caught him again. he won a lot of money, but lost it, and with
 it a deal more besides, which he promised to raise as soon as possible.
 for this purpose he projected a new raid on his town. he never meddled
 with any other town, for he was afraid to venture into houses whose ins
 and outs he did not know and the habits of whose households he was not
 acquainted with. he arrived at the haunted house in disguise on the
 wednesday before the advent of the twins—after writing his aunt
 pratt that he would not arrive until two days after—and lay in
 hiding there with his mother until toward daylight friday morning, when he
 went to his uncle’s house and 
			entered by the back way with his own key, and slipped up to his room, 
			where he could have the use of the mirror and toilet articles. he had 
			a suit of girl’s clothes with him in a bundle as a disguise for 
			his raid, and was wearing a suit of his mother’s clothing, with 
			black gloves and veil. by dawn he was tricked out for his raid, but he 
			caught a glimpse of pudd’nhead wilson through the window over the 
			way, and knew that pudd’nhead had caught a glimpse of him. so he 
			entertained wilson with some airs and graces and attitudes for a while, 
			then stepped out of sight and resumed the other disguise, and by and by 
			went down and out the back way and started down town to reconnoiter the 
			scene of his intended labors.
 but he was ill at ease. he had changed back to roxy’s dress, 
			with the stoop of age added to the disguise, so that wilson would not 
			bother himself about a humble old woman leaving a neighbor’s 
			house by the back way in the early morning, in case he was still spying. 
			but supposing wilson had seen him leave, and had thought it suspicious, 
			and had also followed him? the thought made tom 
			cold. he gave up the raid for the day, and hurried back 
			to the haunted house by the obscurest route he knew. his mother was gone; 
			but she came back, by and by, with the news of the grand reception at 
			patsy cooper’s, and soon persuaded him that the opportunity was 
			like a special providence, it was so inviting and perfect. so he went 
			raiding, after all, and made a nice success of it while everybody was 
			gone to patsy cooper’s. success gave him nerve and even actual 
			intrepidity; insomuch, indeed, that after he had conveyed his harvest to 
			his mother in a back alley, he went to the reception himself, and added 
			several of the valuables of that house to his takings.
 after this long digression we have now arrived once more at the point
 where pudd’nhead wilson, while waiting for the arrival of the 
			twins on that same friday evening, sat puzzling over the strange 
			apparition of that morning—a girl in young tom driscoll’s 
			bedroom; fretting, and guessing, and puzzling over it, and wondering 
			who the shameless creature might be.
pudd’nhead’s startling discovery.
		 there are three infallible ways of pleasing an author, and
 the three form a rising scale of compliment: 
			 , to tell him you have read one of his books;
			 , to tell him you have read all of his books;
			 , to ask him to let you read the manuscript of his 
			 forthcoming book.
			 no.  admits you to his respect; no.  admits you to his admiration; 
			 no.  carries you clear into his heart.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 as to the adjective: when in doubt, 
				strike it out.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
the twins arrived presently, and talk began. 
			it flowed along chattily and sociably, and under its influence the new 
			friendship gathered ease and strength. wilson got out his calendar, by 
			request, and read a passage or two from it, which the twins praised 
			quite cordially. this pleased the author so much that he complied gladly 
			when they asked him to lend them a batch of the work to read at 
			home. 
			in the course of their wide travels they had found out that there are 
			three sure ways of pleasing an author; they were now working the best 
			of the three.
 there was an interruption, now. young tom driscoll appeared, and joined 
			the party. he pretended to be seeing the distinguished strangers for the 
			first time when they rose to shake hands; but this was only a blind, as he 
			had already had a glimpse of them, at the reception, while robbing the 
			house. the twins made mental note that he was smooth-faced and rather 
			handsome, and smooth and undulatory in his movements—graceful, in 
			fact. angelo thought he had a good eye; luigi thought there was something 
			veiled and sly about it. angelo thought he had a pleasant free-and-easy 
			way of talking; luigi thought it was more so than was agreeable. angelo 
			thought he was a sufficiently nice young man; luigi reserved his 
			decision. 
			tom’s first contribution to the conversation was a question which 
			he had put to wilson a hundred times before. it was always cheerily and 
			good-naturedly put, and always inflicted a little pang, 
			for it touched a secret sore; but this time the pang was sharp, since 
			strangers were present.
 “well, how does the law come on? had a case yet?”
 wilson bit his lip, but answered, “no—not yet,” 
			with as much indifference as he could assume. judge driscoll had 
			generously left the law feature out of the wilson biography which 
			he had furnished to the twins. young tom laughed pleasantly, and said:
 “wilson’s a lawyer, gentlemen, but he doesn’t 
			practise now.”
 the sarcasm bit, but wilson kept himself under control, and said without
 passion:
 “i don’t practise, it is true. it is true that i have 
			never had a case, and have had to earn a poor living for twenty years 
			as an expert accountant in a town where i can’t get hold of a 
			set of books to untangle as often as i should like. but it is also 
			true that i did fit myself well for the practice of the law. by the 
			time i was your age, tom, i had chosen a profession, and was soon 
			competent to enter upon it.” tom winced. “i never got a 
			chance to try my hand at it, and i may never get 
			a chance; and yet if i ever do get it i shall be found ready, for i have 
			kept up my law-studies all these 
			years.”
 “that’s it; that’s good grit! i like to see it. 
			i’ve a notion to throw all my business your way. my business 
			and your law-practice ought to make a pretty gay team, dave,” 
			and the young fellow laughed again.
 “if you will throw—” wilson had thought of the girl 
			in tom’s bedroom, and was going to say, “if you will throw 
			the surreptitious and disreputable part of your business my way, it may 
			amount to something;” but thought better of it and said, 
			“however, this matter doesn’t fit well in a general 
			conversation.”
 “all right, we’ll change the subject; i guess you 
			were about to give me another dig, anyway, so i’m willing to 
			change. how’s the awful mystery flourishing these days? 
			wilson’s got a scheme for driving plain window-glass out of 
			the market by decorating it with greasy finger-marks, and getting 
			rich by selling it at famine prices to the crowned heads over
 in europe to outfit their palaces with. fetch it out, dave.”
 wilson brought three of his glass strips, and said—
 “i get the subject to pass the fingers of his right hand through 
			his hair, so as to get a little coating of the natural oil on them, 
			and then press the balls of them on the glass. a fine and delicate 
			print of the lines in the skin results, and is permanent, if it 
			doesn’t come in contact with something able to rub it off. 
			you begin, tom.”
 “why, i think you took my finger-marks once or twice before.”
 “yes; but you were a little boy the last time, 
			only about twelve years old.”
 “that’s so. of course i’ve changed entirely since 
			then, and variety is what the crowned heads want, i guess.”
 he passed his fingers through his crop of short hair, and pressed them one
 at a time on the glass. angelo made a print of his fingers on another
 glass, and luigi followed with the third. wilson marked the glasses with
 names and date, and put them away. tom gave one of his little laughs, and
 said—
 “i thought i wouldn’t say anything, but if 
			variety is what you are after, you have wasted a piece of glass. 
			the hand-print of one twin is the same as the hand-print of the 
			fellow-twin.”
 “well, it’s done now, and i like to have them both, 
			anyway,” said wilson, returning to his place.
 “but look here, dave,” said tom, “you used to tell 
			people’s fortunes, too, when you took their finger-marks. 
			dave’s just an all-round genius—a genius of the first 
			water, gentlemen; a great scientist running to seed here in this village, 
			a prophet with the kind of honor that prophets generally get at 
			home—for here they don’t give shucks for his scientifics, 
			and they call his skull a notion-factory—hey, dave, ain’t it 
			so? but never mind; he’ll make his mark some day—finger-mark, 
			you know, he-he! but really, you want to let him take a shy at your palms 
			once; it’s worth twice the price of	admission or your money’s 
			returned at the door. why, he’ll read your wrinkles as easy as a 
			book, and not only tell you fifty or sixty things that’s going to 
			happen to you, but fifty or sixty thousand that ain’t. come, dave, 
			show the gentlemen 
			what an inspired jack-at-all-science we’ve got in this town, 
			and don’t know it.”
 wilson winced under this nagging and not very courteous chaff, and the
 twins suffered with him and for him. they rightly judged, now, that the
 best way to relieve him would be to take the thing in earnest and treat it
 with respect, ignoring tom’s rather overdone raillery; so 
			luigi said—
 “we have seen something of palmistry in our wanderings, and know 
			very well what astonishing things it can do. if it isn’t a 
			science, and one of the greatest of them, too, i don’t know what 
			its other name ought to be. in the orient—”
 tom looked surprised and incredulous. he said—
 “that juggling a science? but really, you ain’t 
			serious, are you?”
 “yes, entirely so. four years ago we had our hands read 
			out to us as if our palms had been covered with print.”
 “well, do you mean to say there was actually anything in it?” 
			asked tom, his incredulity beginning to weaken a little.
 “there was this much in it,” said angelo: “what was 
			told us of our characters was minutely exact—we could not have 
			bettered it ourselves. next, two or three memorable things that 
			had happened to us were laid bare—things which no one present 
			but ourselves could have known about.”
 “why, it’s rank sorcery!” exclaimed tom, who was now 
			becoming very much interested. “and how did they make out with 
			what was going to happen to you in the future?”
 “on the whole, quite fairly,” said luigi. “two 
			or three of the most striking things foretold have happened since; 
			much the most striking one of all happened within that same year. 
			some of the minor prophecies have come true; some of the minor and 
			some of the major ones have not been fulfilled yet, and of course 
			may never be: still, i should be more surprised if they failed to 
			arrive than if they didn’t.”
 tom was entirely sobered, and profoundly impressed. he said,
 apologetically—
 “dave, i wasn’t meaning to belittle that science; i was 
			only chaffing—chattering, i 
			reckon i’d better say. i wish you would look at their palms. 
			come, won’t you?”
 “why certainly, if you want me to; but you know i’ve 
			had no chance to become an expert, and don’t claim to be one. 
			when a past event is somewhat prominently recorded in the palm i can 
			generally detect that, but minor ones often escape me,—not always, 
			of course, but often,—but i haven’t much confidence in myself 
			when it comes to reading the future. i am talking as if palmistry was a 
			daily study with me, but that is not so. i haven’t examined half 
			a dozen hands in the last half dozen years; you see, the people got to 
			joking about it, and i stopped to let the talk die down. i’ll 
			tell you what we’ll do, count luigi: i’ll make a try at your
 past, and if i have any success there—no, on the whole, i’ll 
			let the future alone; that’s really the affair of an expert.”
 he took luigi’s hand. tom said—
 “wait—don’t look yet, dave! count luigi, here’s 
			paper and pencil. set down that thing that you said was the most striking 
			one that was foretold to you, and happened less 
			than a year afterward, and give it to me so i can see if dave finds it 
			in your hand.”
 luigi wrote a line privately, and folded up the piece of paper, and handed
 it to tom, saying—
 “i’ll tell you when to look at it, if he finds it.”
 wilson began to study luigi’s palm, tracing life lines, heart 
			lines, head lines, and so on, and noting carefully their relations with 
			the cobweb of finer and more delicate marks and lines that enmeshed them 
			on all sides; he felt of the fleshy cushion at the base of the thumb, and 
			noted its shape; he felt of the fleshy side of the hand between the wrist 
			and the base of the little finger, 
			and noted its shape also; he painstakingly examined the fingers, observing 
			their form, proportions, and natural manner of disposing themselves when 
			in repose. all this process was watched by the three spectators with 
			absorbing interest, their heads bent together over luigi’s palm, 
			and nobody disturbing the stillness with a word. wilson now entered upon 
			a close survey of the palm again, and his revelations began.
 he mapped out luigi’s character and disposition, his tastes, 
			aversions, proclivities, ambitions, and eccentricities in a way which 
			sometimes made luigi wince and the others laugh, but both twins declared 
			that the chart was artistically drawn and was correct.
 next, wilson took up luigi’s history. he proceeded cautiously 
			and with hesitation, now, moving his finger slowly along the great 
			lines of the palm, and now and then halting it at a 
			“star” or some such landmark, and examining that neighborhood 
			minutely. he proclaimed one or two past events, luigi confirmed his 
			correctness, and the search went on. presently wilson glanced up suddenly 
			with a surprised expression—
 “here is a record of an incident which you would perhaps 
			not wish me to—”
 “bring it out,” said luigi, good-naturedly; 
			“i promise you it sha’n’t embarrass me.”
 but wilson still hesitated, and did not seem quite to know what to do.
 then he said—
 “i think it is too delicate a matter to—to—i 
			believe i would rather write it or whisper it to you, and let you 
			decide for yourself whether you want it talked out or not.”
 “that will answer,” said luigi; “write it.”
 wilson wrote something on a slip of paper and handed it to luigi, 
			who read it to himself and said to tom—
 “unfold your slip and read it, mr. driscoll.”
 tom read:
 “it was prophesied that i would kill a man.
			it came true before the year was out.”
 tom added, “great scott!”
 luigi handed wilson’s paper to tom, and said—
 “now read this one.”
 tom read:
 “you have killed some one, but whether man, woman or
			child, i do not make out.”
 “cæsar’s ghost!” commented tom, 
			with astonishment. “it beats anything that was ever 
			heard of! why, a man’s own hand is his deadliest enemy! 
			just think of that—a man’s own hand keeps a record 
			of the deepest and fatalest secrets of his life, and is 
			treacherously ready to expose him to any black-magic stranger 
			that comes along. but what do you 
			let a person look at your hand for, with that awful thing printed 
			on it?”
 “oh,” said luigi, reposefully, “i 
			don’t mind it. i killed the man for good reasons, and 
			i don’t regret it.”
 “what were the reasons?”
 “well, he needed killing.”
 “i’ll tell you why he did it, since he won’t say 
			himself,” said angelo, warmly. “he did it to save my life, 
			that’s what he did it for. so it was a noble act, and 
			not a thing to be hid in the dark.”
 “so it was, so it was,” said wilson; “to do such a 
			thing to save a brother’s life is a great and fine action.”
 “now come,” said luigi, “it is very pleasant 
			to hear you say these things, but for unselfishness, or heroism, or 
			magnanimity, the circumstances won’t stand scrutiny. you 
			overlook one detail; suppose i hadn’t saved angelo’s
 life, what would have become of mine? if i had let the man kill him,
 wouldn’t he have killed me, too? i saved my own life, 
			you see.”
 “yes, that is your way of talking,” said 
			angelo, 
			“but i know you—i don’t believe you thought of 
			yourself at all. i keep that weapon yet that luigi killed the man with, 
			and i’ll show it to you sometime. that incident makes it 
			interesting, and it had a history before it came into luigi’s
 hands which adds to its interest. it was given to luigi by a great indian
 prince, the gaikowar of baroda, and it had been in his family two or three
 centuries. it killed a good many disagreeable people who troubled that
 hearthstone at one time and another. it isn’t much too look at, 
			except that it isn’t shaped like other knives, or dirks, or 
			whatever it may be called—here, i’ll draw it for 
			you.” he took a sheet of paper and made a rapid sketch.
 “there it is—a broad and murderous blade, with edges 
			like a razor for sharpness. the devices engraved on it are the ciphers 
			or names of its long line of possessors—i had luigi’s name 
			added in roman letters myself with our coat of arms, as you see. you 
			notice what a curious handle the thing has. it is solid ivory, 
			polished like a mirror, and is four or five inches long—round, 
			and as thick as 
			a large man’s wrist, with the end squared off 
			flat, for your thumb to rest on; for you grasp it, with your thumb 
			resting on the blunt end—so—and lift it aloft and strike 
			downward. the gaikowar showed us how the thing was done when he
 gave it to luigi, and before that night was ended luigi had used the
 knife, and the gaikowar was a man short by reason of it. the sheath is
 magnificently ornamented with gems of great value. you will find the
			sheath more worth looking at than the knife itself, of course.”
 tom said to himself—
 “it’s lucky i came here. i would have sold that knife 
			for a song; i supposed the jewels were glass.”
 “but go on; don’t stop,” said wilson. “our 
			curiosity is up now, to hear about the homicide. tell us about 
			that.”
 “well, briefly, the knife was to blame for that, all around. 
			a native servant slipped into our room in the palace in the night, 
			to kill us and steal the knife on account of the fortune incrusted 
			on its sheath, without a doubt. luigi had it under his pillow; 
			we 
			were in bed together. there was a dim night-light burning. i 
			was asleep, but luigi was awake, and he thought he detected a vague 
			form nearing the bed. he slipped the knife out of the sheath and was 
			ready, and unembarrassed by hampering bed-clothes, for the weather was 
			hot and we hadn’t any. suddenly that native rose at the
 bedside, and bent over me with his right hand lifted and a dirk in it
 aimed at my throat; but luigi grabbed his wrist, pulled him downward, and
 drove his own knife into the man’s neck. that is the whole 
			story.”
 wilson and tom drew deep breaths, and after some general chat about the
 tragedy, pudd’nhead said, taking tom’s hand—
 “now, tom, i’ve never had a look at your palms, as it happens; 
			perhaps you’ve got some little questionable privacies that 
			need—hel-lo!”
 tom had snatched away his hand, and was looking a good deal confused.
 “why, he’s blushing!” said luigi.
 tom darted an ugly look at him, and said sharply—
 “well, if i am, it ain’t because i’m a 
			murderer!” luigi’s dark face flushed, but before he 
			could speak or move, tom added with anxious haste:
 “oh, i beg a thousand pardons. i didn’t mean that; 
			it was out before i thought, and i’m very, very 
			sorry—you must forgive me!”
 wilson came to the rescue, and smoothed things down as well as he could;
 and in fact was entirely successful as far as the twins were concerned,
 for they felt sorrier for the affront put upon him by his guest’s 
			outburst of ill manners than for the insult offered to luigi. but the 
			success was not so pronounced with the offender. tom tried to seem at 
			his ease, and he went through the motions fairly well, but at bottom 
			he felt resentful toward all the three witnesses of his exhibition; 
			in fact, he felt so annoyed at them for having witnessed it and noticed 
			it that he almost forgot to feel annoyed at himself for placing it 
			before them. however, something presently happened which made him almost 
			comfortable, and brought him nearly back to a state of charity and 
			friendliness. 
			this was a little spat between the twins; not much of a 
			spat, but still a spat; and before they got far with it they were in 
			a decided condition of irritation with each other. tom was charmed; 
			so pleased, indeed, that he cautiously did what he could to increase the 
			irritation while pretending to be actuated by more respectable motives. by
 his help the fire got warmed up to the blazing-point, and he might have
 had the happiness of seeing the flames show up, in another moment, but for
 the interruption of a knock on the door—an interruption which
 fretted him as much as it gratified wilson. wilson opened the door.
 the visitor was a good-natured, ignorant, energetic, middle-aged irishman
 named john buckstone, who was a great politician in a small way, and
 always took a large share in public matters of every sort. one of the 
			town’s chief excitements, just now, was over the matter of rum. 
			there was a strong rum party and a strong anti-rum party. buckstone was 
			training with the rum party, and he had been sent to hunt up the twins 
			and invite 
			them to attend a mass-meeting of that faction. he delivered his errand, 
			and said the clans were already gathering in the big hall over the 
			market-house. luigi accepted the invitation cordially, angelo less 
			cordially, since he disliked crowds, and did not drink the powerful 
			intoxicants of america. in fact, he was even a teetotaler 
			sometimes—when it was judicious to be one.
 the twins left with buckstone, and tom driscoll joined company with
 them uninvited.
 in the distance one could see a long wavering line of torches drifting
 down the main street, and could hear the throbbing of the bass drum, the
 clash of cymbals, the squeaking of a fife or two, and the faint roar of
 remote hurrahs. the tail-end of this procession was climbing the 
			market-house stairs when the twins arrived in its neighborhood; when 
			they reached the hall it was full of people, torches, smoke, noise and 
			enthusiasm. they were conducted to the platform by buckstone—tom 
			driscoll still following—and were delivered to the chairman in the 
			midst of a prodigious explosion of welcome. when 
			the noise had moderated a little, the chair proposed that “our 
			illustrious guests be at once elected, by complimentary acclamation, 
			to membership in our ever-glorious organization, the paradise of the 
			free and the perdition of the slave.”
 this eloquent discharge opened the flood-gates of enthusiasm again, and 
			the election was carried with thundering unanimity. then arose a storm 
			of cries:
 “wet them down! wet them down! give them a drink!”
 glasses of whisky were handed to the twins. luigi waved his aloft, then
 brought it to his lips; but angelo set his down. there was another storm
 of cries:
 “what’s the matter with the other one?” 
			“what is the blond one going back on us for?”
			“explain! explain!”
 the chairman inquired, and then reported—
 “we have made an unfortunate mistake, gentlemen. i find that 
			the count angelo 
			capello is opposed to our creed—is a teetotaler, 
			in fact, and was not intending to apply for membership with us. he 
			desires that we 
			reconsider the vote by which he was elected. what is the 
			pleasure of the house?”
 there was a general burst of laughter, plentifully accented with
 whistlings and cat-calls, but the energetic use of the gavel presently
 restored something like order. then a man spoke from the crowd, and said
 that while he was very sorry that the mistake had been made, it would not
 be possible to rectify it at the present meeting. according to the 
			by-laws it must go over to the next regular meeting for action. he would 
			not offer a motion, as none was required. he desired to apologize to the 
			gentleman in the name of the house, and begged to assure him that as far 
			as it might lie in the power of the sons of liberty, his temporary 
			membership in the order would be made pleasant to him.
 this speech was received with great applause, mixed with cries of—
 “that’s the talk!” “he’s 
			a good fellow, anyway, if he is a
 teetotaler!” “drink his health!” 
			“give him a rouser, and no heeltaps!”
 glasses were handed around, and everybody 
			on the platform drank angelo’s health, while the house bellowed 
			forth in song:
			 for he’s a jolly good fel-low,
			 for he’s a jolly good fel-low,
			 for he’s a jolly good fe-el-low,—
			 which nobody can deny.
 tom driscoll drank. it was his second glass, for he had drunk 
			angelo’s the moment that angelo had set it down. the two drinks 
			made him very merry—almost idiotically so—and he began to 
			take a most lively and prominent part in the proceedings, particularly 
			in the music and cat-calls and side-remarks.
 the chairman was still standing at the front, the twins at his side. the
 extraordinarily close resemblance of the brothers to each other suggested
 a witticism to tom driscoll, and just as the chairman began a speech he
 skipped forward and said with an air of tipsy confidence to the
 audience—
 “boys, i move that he keeps still and lets this human 
			philopena snip you out a speech.”
 the descriptive aptness of the phrase caught the house, and a mighty burst
 of laughter followed.
 luigi’s southern blood leaped to the boiling-point in a moment 
			under the sharp humiliation of this insult delivered in the presence 
			of four hundred strangers. it was not in the young man’s nature 
			to let the matter pass, or to delay the squaring of the account. he 
			took a couple of strides and halted behind the unsuspecting joker. 
			then he drew back and delivered a kick of such titanic vigor that it 
			lifted tom clear over the footlights and landed him on the heads of 
			the front row of the sons of liberty.
 even a sober person does not like to have a human being emptied on him
 when he is not doing any harm; a person who is not sober cannot endure
 such an attention at all. the nest of sons of liberty that driscoll landed
 in had not a sober bird in it; in fact there was probably not an entirely
 sober one in the auditorium. driscoll was promptly and indignantly flung
 on to the heads of sons in the next row, and these sons passed him on 
			toward the rear, and then immediately began to pummel the front-row sons 
			who had passed him to them. this course was strictly 
			followed by bench after bench as driscoll traveled in his tumultuous and 
			airy flight toward the door; so he left behind him an ever lengthening 
			wake of raging and plunging and fighting and swearing humanity. down 
			went group after group of torches, and presently above the deafening 
			clatter of the gavel, roar of angry voices, and crash of succumbing 
			benches, rose the paralyzing cry of 
			“fire!”
 the fighting ceased instantly; the cursing ceased; for one distinctly
 defined moment there was a dead hush, a motionless calm, where the
 tempest had been; then with one impulse the multitude awoke to life and
 energy again, and went surging and struggling and swaying, this way and
 that, its outer edges melting away through windows and doors and gradually
 lessening the pressure and relieving the mass.
 the fire-boys were never on hand so suddenly before; for there was no
 distance to go, this time, their quarters being in the rear end of the
 market-house. there was an engine company and a hook-and-ladder company.
 half of each was composed of rummies and 
			the other half of anti-rummies, after the moral and political 
			share-and-share-alike fashion of the frontier town of the period. 
			enough anti-rummies were loafing in quarters to man the engine and the 
			ladders. in two minutes they had their red shirts and helmets 
			on—they never stirred officially in unofficial costume—and 
			as the mass meeting overhead smashed through the long row of windows and 
			poured out upon the roof of the arcade, the deliverers were ready for 
			them with a powerful stream of water which washed some of them off the 
			roof and nearly drowned the rest. but water was preferable to fire, and 
			still the stampede from the windows continued, and still the pitiless 
			drenching assailed it until the building was empty; then the fire-boys 
			mounted to the hall and flooded it with water enough to annihilate forty 
			times as much fire as there was there; for a village fire-company does
			not often get a chance to show off, and so when it does get a chance it 
			makes the most of it. such citizens of that village as were of a 
			thoughtful and judicious temperament did not insure against fire; they 
			insured against the fire-company.
the shame of judge driscoll.
 courage is resistance to fear, mastery of fear—not absence
 of fear. except a creature be part coward it is not a compliment to 
		 say it is brave; it is merely a loose misapplication of the word. 
		 consider the flea!—incomparably the bravest of all the 
		 creatures of god, if ignorance of fear were courage. whether you 
		 are asleep or awake he will attack you, caring nothing for the fact 
		 that in bulk and strength you are to him as are the massed armies 
		 of the earth to a sucking child; he lives both day and night and
 all days and nights in the very lap of peril and the immediate presence 
		 of death, and yet is no more afraid than is the man who walks the streets 
		 of a city that was threatened by an earthquake ten centuries before. 
		 when we speak of clive, nelson, and putnam as men who 
		 “didn’t know what fear was,” we ought always to add 
		 the flea—and put him at the head of the 
		 procession.—pudd’nhead wilson’s calendar.
judge driscoll was in bed and asleep by ten 
			o’clock on friday night, and he was up and gone a-fishing before 
			daylight in the morning with his friend pembroke howard. these two had 
			been boys together in virginia 
			when that state still ranked as the chief 
			and most imposing member of the union, and they still coupled the proud 
			and affectionate adjective “old” with her name when they 
			spoke of her. in missouri a recognized superiority attached to any 
			person who hailed from old virginia; and this superiority was exalted 
			to supremacy when a person of such nativity could also prove descent 
			from the first families of that great commonwealth. the howards and 
			driscolls were of this aristocracy. in their eyes it was a nobility. 
			it had its unwritten laws, and they were as clearly defined and as 
			strict as any that could be found among the printed statutes of the 
			land. the f.f.v. was born a gentleman; his highest duty in 
			life was to watch over that great inheritance and keep it unsmirched. he 
			must keep his honor spotless. those laws were his chart; his course was 
			marked out on it; if he swerved from it by so much as half a point 
			of the compass it meant shipwreck to his honor; that is to say, 
			degradation from his rank as a gentleman. these laws required certain 
			things of him which his religion might 
			forbid: then his religion must yield—the laws could not be relaxed 
			to accommodate religions or anything else. honor stood first; and the 
			laws defined what it was and wherein it differed in certain details from 
			honor as defined by church creeds and by the social laws and customs
			of some of the minor divisions of the globe that had got crowded out when
 the sacred boundaries of virginia were staked out.
 if judge driscoll was the recognized first citizen of dawson’s 
			landing, pembroke howard was easily its recognized second citizen. he 
			was called “the great lawyer”—an earned title. 
			he and driscoll were of the same age—a year or two past sixty.
 although driscoll was a free-thinker and howard a strong and determined
 presbyterian, their warm intimacy suffered no impairment in consequence.
 they were men whose opinions were their own property and not subject to
 revision and amendment, suggestion or criticism, by anybody, even their
 friends.
 the day’s fishing finished, they came floating 
			down stream in their skiff, talking national politics and other high 
			matters, and presently met a skiff coming up from town, with a man in 
			it who said:
 “i reckon you know one of the new twins gave your nephew a 
			kicking last night, judge?”
 “did what?”
 “gave him a kicking.”
 the old judge’s lips paled, and his eyes began to flame. he 
			choked with anger for a moment, then he got out what he was trying to 
			say—
 “well—well—go on! give me the details!”
 the man did it. at the finish the judge was silent a minute, turning over
 in his mind the shameful picture of tom’s flight over the 
			footlights; then he said, as if musing 
			aloud—“h’m—i don’t understand it. 
			i was asleep at home. he didn’t wake me. thought he was competent 
			to manage his affair without my help, i reckon.” his face lit up 
			with pride and pleasure at that thought, and he said with a cheery 
			complacency, “i like that—it’s the true old 
			blood—hey, pembroke?”
 howard smiled an iron smile, and nodded his head approvingly. then the
 news-bringer spoke again—
 “but tom beat the twin on the trial.”
 the judge looked at the man wonderingly, and said—
 “the trial? what trial?”
 “why, tom had him up before judge robinson for assault 
			and battery.”
 the old man shrank suddenly together like one who has received a 
			death-stroke. howard sprang for him as he sank forward in a swoon, and 
			took him in his arms, and bedded him on his back in the boat. he sprinkled 
			water in his face, and said to the startled visitor—
 “go, now—don’t let him come to and find you here. 
			you see what an effect your heedless speech has had; you ought to have 
			been more considerate than to blurt out such a cruel piece of 
			slander as that.”
 “i’m right down sorry i did it now, mr. howard, and i 
			wouldn’t have done it if i had thought: but it ain’t slander; 
			it’s perfectly true, just as i told him.”
 he rowed away. presently the old judge came out of his faint and looked up
 piteously into the sympathetic face that was bent over him.
 “say it ain’t true, pembroke; tell me it ain’t 
			true!” he said in a weak voice.
 there was nothing weak in the deep organ-tones that responded—
 “you know it’s a lie as well as i do, old friend. he is of the 
			best blood of the old dominion.”
 “god bless you for saying it!” said the old gentleman, 
			fervently. “ah, pembroke, it was such a blow!”
 howard stayed by his friend, and saw him home, and entered the house with
 him. it was dark, and past supper-time, but the judge was not thinking of
 supper; he was eager to hear the slander refuted from headquarters, and as
 eager to have howard hear it, too. tom was sent for, and he came
 immediately. he was bruised and lame, and was not a happy-looking object.
 his uncle made him sit down, and said—
 “we have been hearing about your adventure, 
			tom, with a handsome lie added to it for embellishment. now pulverize that 
			lie to dust! what measures have you taken? how does the thing 
			stand?”
 tom answered guilelessly: “it don’t stand at all; 
			it’s all over. i had him up in court and beat him. 
			pudd’nhead wilson defended him—first case
 he ever had, and lost it. the judge fined the miserable 
			hound five dollars for the assault.”
 howard and the judge sprang to their feet with the opening 
			sentence—why, neither knew; then they stood gazing vacantly at 
			each other. howard stood a moment, then sat mournfully down without 
			saying anything. the judge’s wrath began to kindle, and 
			he burst out—
 “you cur! you scum! you vermin! do you mean to tell me that blood 
			of my race has suffered a blow and crawled to a court of law about 
			it? answer me!”
 tom’s head drooped, and he answered with an eloquent silence. 
			his uncle stared at him with a mixed expression of amazement and 
			shame and incredulity that was sorrowful to see. at last he said—
 “which of the twins was it?”
 “count luigi.”
 “you have challenged him?”
 “n—no,” hesitated tom, turning pale.
 “you will challenge him to-night. howard will carry it.”
 tom began to turn sick, and to show it. he turned his hat round and round
 in his hand, his uncle glowering blacker and blacker upon him as the heavy
 seconds drifted by; then at last he began to stammer, and said 
			piteously—
 “oh, please don’t ask me to do it, uncle! he is a 
			murderous devil—i never could—i—i’m 
			afraid of him!”
 old driscoll’s mouth opened and closed three times before 
			he could get it to perform its office; then he stormed out—
 “a coward in my family! a driscoll a coward! oh, what have i done 
			to deserve this infamy!” he tottered to his secretary in the 
			corner repeating that lament again and again in heartbreaking tones, 
			and got out of a drawer a paper, which he slowly tore to bits 
			scattering the bits absently in his track as he 
			walked up and down the room, still grieving and lamenting. at last he 
			said—
 “there it is, shreds and fragments once more—my will. 
			once more you have forced me to disinherit you, you base son 
			of a most noble father! leave my sight! go—before 
			i spit on you!”
 the young man did not tarry. then the judge turned to howard:
 “you will be my second, old friend?”
 “of course.”
 “there is pen and paper. draft the cartel, and lose no time.”
 “the count shall have it in his hands in fifteen 
			minutes,” said howard.
 tom was very heavy-hearted. his appetite was gone with his property 
			and his self-respect. he went out the back way and wandered down the 
			obscure lane grieving, and wondering if any course of future 
			conduct, however discreet and carefully perfected and watched over, 
			could win back his uncle’s favor and persuade him to 
			reconstruct once more that generous will which had just gone to ruin 
			before his eyes. he finally concluded 
			that it could. he said to himself that he had accomplished this sort of 
			triumph once already, and that what had been done once could be done 
			again. he would set about it. he would bend every energy to the task, 
			and he would score that triumph once more, cost what it might to his 
			convenience, limit as it might his frivolous and liberty-loving life.
 “to begin,” he said to himself, “i’ll square 
			up with the proceeds of my raid, and then gambling has got to be 
			stopped—and stopped short off. it’s the worst vice 
			i’ve got—from my standpoint, anyway, because
 it’s the one he can most easily find out, through the impatience 
			of my creditors. he thought it expensive to have to pay two hundred 
			dollars to them for me once. expensive—that! why, it 
			cost me the whole of his fortune—but of course he never thought 
			of that; some people can’t think of any but their own side of a 
			case. if he had known how deep i am in, now, the will would have gone 
			to pot without waiting for a duel to help. three hundred dollars! 
			it’s a pile! but he’ll never hear of it, i’m
 thankful to say. the minute i’ve 
			cleared it off, i’m safe; and i’ll never touch a card again. 
			anyway, i won’t while he lives, i make oath to that. i’m 
			entering on my last reform—i know it—yes, and i’ll win;
 but after that, if i ever slip again i’m gone.”
tom stares at ruin.
		 when i reflect upon the number of disagreeable people who i
 know have gone to a better world, i am moved to lead a
 different life.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 october. this is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to
 speculate in stocks in. the others are july, january,
 september, april, november, may, march, june, december,
 august, and february.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
thus mournfully communing with himself tom 
			moped along the lane past pudd’nhead wilson’s
			house, and still 
			on and on between fences inclosing vacant country on each hand till he 
			neared the haunted house, then he came moping back again, with many sighs 
			and heavy with trouble. he sorely wanted cheerful company. rowena! his 
			heart gave a bound at the thought, but the next thought quieted 
			it—the detested twins would be there.
 he was on the inhabited side of wilson’s 
			house, and now as he approached it he noticed that the sitting-room was 
			lighted. this would do; others made him feel unwelcome sometimes, but 
			wilson never failed in courtesy toward him, and a kindly courtesy does 
			at least save one’s feelings, even if it is not professing to stand 
			for a welcome. wilson heard footsteps at his threshold, then the clearing 
			of a throat.
 “it’s that fickle-tempered, dissipated young 
			goose—poor devil, he find friends pretty scarce to-day, 
			likely, after the disgrace of carrying a personal-assault case 
			into a law-court.”
 a dejected knock. “come in!”
 tom entered, and drooped into a chair, without saying anything. wilson
 said kindly—
 “why, my boy, you look desolate. don’t take it so hard. 
			try and forget you have been 
			kicked.”
 “oh, dear,” said tom, wretchedly, “it’s 
			not that, pudd’nhead—it’s not that. it’s a 
			thousand times worse than that—oh, yes, a million
 times worse.”
 “why, tom, what do you mean? has rowena—”
 “flung me? no, but the old man has.”
 wilson said to himself, “aha!” and thought of the 
			mysterious girl in the bedroom. “the driscolls have been 
			making discoveries!” then he said aloud, gravely:
 “tom, there are some kinds of dissipation which—”
 “oh, shucks, this hasn’t got anything to do with 
			dissipation. he wanted me to challenge that derned italian savage, 
			and i wouldn’t do it.”
 “yes, of course he would do that,” said wilson in a meditative
 matter-of-course way, “but the thing that puzzled me was, why 
			he didn’t look to that last night, for one thing, and why he 
			let you carry such a matter into a court of law at all, either 
			before the duel or after it. it’s no place for it. it was not 
			like him. i couldn’t understand it. how did it happen?”
 “it happened because he didn’t know anything about it. 
			he was asleep when i got home last night.”
 “and you didn’t wake him? tom, is that possible?”
 tom was not getting much comfort here. he fidgeted a moment, then said:
 “i didn’t choose to tell him—that’s all. 
			he was going a-fishing before dawn, with pembroke howard, and if i 
			got the twins into the common calaboose—and i thought sure i 
			could—i never dreamed of their slipping out on a paltry fine 
			for such an outrageous offense—well, once in the calaboose 
			they would be disgraced, and uncle wouldn’t want any
 duels with that sort of characters, and wouldn’t allow any.”
 “tom, i am ashamed of you! i don’t see how you could treat 
			your good old uncle so. i am a better friend of his than you are; for 
			if i had known the circumstances i would have kept that case out of 
			court until i got word to him and let him have a gentleman’s 
			chance.”
 “you would?” exclaimed tom, with lively surprise. 
			“and it your first case! and you know perfectly well there 
			never would have been any case if he had got that chance, 
			don’t 
			you? and you’d have finished your days a pauper 
			nobody, instead of being an actually launched and recognized lawyer
 to-day. and you would really have done that, would you?”
 “certainly.”
 tom looked at him a moment or two, then shook his head sorrowfully and
 said—
 “i believe you—upon my word i do. i don’t know 
			why i do, but i do. pudd’nhead wilson, i think you’re 
			the biggest fool i ever saw.”
 “thank you.”
 “don’t mention it.”
 “well, he has been requiring you to fight the italian and you have
 refused. you degenerate remnant of an honorable line! i’m thoroughly
 ashamed of you, tom!”
 “oh, that’s nothing! i don’t care for anything, now 
			that the will’s torn up again.”
 “tom, tell me squarely—didn’t he find any fault with 
			you for anything but those two things—carrying the case into 
			court and refusing to fight?”
 he watched the young fellow’s face narrowly, but it was entirely
 reposeful, and so also was the voice that answered:
 “no, he didn’t find any other fault with me. if he had 
			had any to find, he would have begun yesterday, for he was just in the 
			humor for it. he drove that jack-pair around town and showed them the 
			sights, and when he came home he couldn’t find his father’s 
			old silver watch that don’t keep time and he thinks so much of, 
			and couldn’t remember what he did with it three or four days ago 
			when he saw it last, and so when i arrived he was all in a sweat about it,
			and when i suggested that it probably wasn’t lost but stolen, it put 
			him in a regular passion and he said i was a fool—which convinced 
			me, without any trouble, that that was just what he was afraid 
			had happened, himself, but did not want to believe it, because 
			lost things stand a better chance of being found again than stolen 
			ones.”
 “whe-ew!” whistled wilson; 
			“score another on the list.”
 “another what?”
 “another theft!”
 “theft?”
 “yes, theft. that watch isn’t lost, it’s 
			stolen. there’s been another raid on the town—and just the 
			same old mysterious sort of thing that has happened once before, as you 
			remember.”
 “you don’t mean it!”
 “it’s as sure as you are born! have you missed anything 
			yourself?”
 “no. that is, i did miss a silver pencil-case that aunt mary 
			pratt gave me last birthday—”
 “you’ll find it stolen—that’s what 
			you’ll find.”
 “no, i sha’n’t; for when i suggested theft about 
			the watch and got such a rap, i went and examined my room, and the 
			pencil-case was missing, but it was only mislaid, and i found 
			it again.”
 “you are sure you missed nothing else?”
 “well, nothing of consequence. i missed a small plain gold 
			ring worth two or three dollars, but that will turn up. 
			i’ll look again.”
 “in my opinion you’ll not find it. there’s been 
			a raid, i tell you. come in!”
 mr. justice robinson entered, followed by 
			buckstone and the town-constable, jim blake. they sat down, and after 
			some wandering and aimless weather-conversation wilson said—
 “by the way, we’ve just added another to the list of 
			thefts, maybe two. judge driscoll’s old silver watch is gone, 
			and tom here has missed a gold ring.”
 “well, it is a bad business,” said the justice, 
			“and gets worse the further it goes. the hankses, the dobsons, 
			the pilligrews, the ortons, the grangers, the hales, the fullers, the 
			holcombs, in fact everybody that lives around about patsy cooper’s 
			has been robbed of little things like trinkets and teaspoons and 
			such-like small valuables that are easily carried off. it’s 
			perfectly plain that the thief took advantage of the reception at patsy 
			cooper’s when all the neighbors were in her house and all their 
			niggers hanging around her fence for a look at the show, to raid the 
			vacant houses undisturbed. patsy is miserable about it; miserable on 
			account of the neighbors, and particularly miserable on account of her 
			foreigners, of course; so miserable 
			on their account that she hasn’t any room to worry about her own 
			little losses.”
 “it’s the same old raider,” said wilson. “i 
			suppose there isn’t any doubt about that.”
 “constable blake doesn’t think so.”
 “no, you’re wrong there,” said blake; 
			“the other times it was a man; there was plenty of signs of that, 
			as we know, in the profession, though we never got hands on him; 
			but this time it’s a woman.”
 wilson thought of the mysterious girl straight off. she was always in his
 mind now. but she failed him again. blake continued:
 “she’s a stoop-shouldered old woman with a covered basket 
			on her arm, in a black veil, dressed in mourning. i saw her going 
			aboard the ferry-boat yesterday. lives in illinois, i reckon; but 
			i don’t care where she lives, i’m going to get 
			her—she can make herself sure of that.”
 “what makes you think she’s the thief?”
 “well, there ain’t any other, for one thing; and for 
			another, some nigger draymen that happened to be driving along saw 
			her coming out of or going into houses, and told 
			me so—and it just happens that they was robbed houses,
 every time.”
 it was granted that this was plenty good enough circumstantial evidence. 
			a pensive silence followed, which lasted some moments, then wilson 
			said—
 “there’s one good thing, anyway. she can’t either 
			pawn or sell count luigi’s costly indian dagger.”
 “my!” said tom, “is that gone?”
 “yes.”
 “well, that was a haul! but why can’t she pawn it or 
			sell it?”
 “because when the twins went home from the sons of liberty 
			meeting last night, news of the raid was sifting in from everywhere, 
			and aunt patsy was in distress to know if they had lost anything. 
			they found that the dagger was gone, and they notified the police and 
			pawnbrokers everywhere. it was a great haul, yes, but the old woman 
			won’t get anything out of it, because she’ll get 
			caught.”
 “did they offer a reward?” asked buckstone.
 “yes; five hundred dollars for the knife, and five hundred 
			more for the thief.”
 “what a leather-headed idea!” exclaimed the constable. 
			“the thief da’sn’t go near them, nor send anybody. 
			whoever goes is going to get himself nabbed, for their ain’t 
			any pawnbroker that’s going to lose the chance to—”
 if anybody had noticed tom’s face at that time, the gray-green 
			color of it might have provoked curiosity; but nobody did. he said to 
			himself: “i’m gone! i never can square up; the rest of the 
			plunder won’t pawn or sell for half of the bill. oh, i know 
			it—i’m gone, i’m gone—and this time it’s 
			for good. oh, this is awful—i don’t know what to do,
 nor which way to turn!”
 “softly, softly,” said wilson to blake. “i 
			planned their scheme for them at midnight last night, and it was all 
			finished up shipshape by two this morning. they’ll get their 
			dagger back, and then i’ll explain to you how
 the thing was done.”
 there were strong signs of a general curiosity, and buckstone said—
 “well, you have whetted us up pretty sharp, wilson, and i’m 
			free to say that 
			if you don’t mind telling us in confidence—”
 “oh, i’d as soon tell as not, buckstone, but as long as 
			the twins and i agreed to say nothing about it, we must let it stand so. 
			but you can take my word for it you won’t be kept waiting three 
			days. somebody will apply for that reward pretty promptly, and 
			i’ll show you the thief and the dagger both very soon 
			afterward.”
 the constable was disappointed, and also perplexed. he said—
 “it may all be—yes, and i hope it will, but i’m blamed 
			if i can see my way through it. it’s too many for yours 
			truly.”
 the subject seemed about talked out. nobody seemed to have anything
 further to offer. after a silence the justice of the peace informed wilson
 that he and buckstone and the constable had come as a committee, on the
 part of the democratic party, to ask him to run for mayor—for the
 little town was about to become a city and the first charter election was
 approaching. it was the first attention which wilson had ever received at
 the hands of any party; it was a sufficiently humble one, but it was a
 recognition of his début into the town’s life and activities 
			at last; it was a step upward, and he was deeply gratified. he accepted, 
			and the committee departed, followed by young tom.
roxana insists upon reform.
		 the true southern watermelon is a boon apart, and not to be
 mentioned with commoner things. it is chief of this world’s
 luxuries, king by the grace of god over all the fruits of
 the earth. when one has tasted it, he knows what the angels
 eat. it was not a southern watermelon that eve took: we know
 it because she repented.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
about the time that wilson was bowing the 
			committee out, pembroke howard was entering the next house to report. 
			he found the old judge sitting grim and straight in his chair, waiting.
 “well, howard—the news?”
 “the best in the world.”
 “accepts, does he?” and the light of battle gleamed 
			joyously in the judge’s eye.
 “accepts? why, he jumped at it.”
 “did, did he? now that’s fine—that’s very fine. 
			i like that. when is it to be?”
 “now! straight off! to-night! an admirable 
			fellow—admirable!”
 “admirable? he’s a darling! why, it’s an honor 
			as well as a pleasure to stand up before such a man. come—off 
			with you! go and arrange everything—and give him my heartiest 
			compliments. a rare fellow, indeed; an admirable fellow, as you have 
			said!”
		 howard hurried away, saying—
 “i’ll have him in the vacant stretch between wilson’s 
			and the haunted house within the hour, and i’ll bring my own 
			pistols.”
 judge driscoll began to walk the floor in a state of pleased excitement;
 but presently he stopped, and began to think—began to think of tom.
 twice he moved toward the secretary, and twice he turned away again; but
 finally he said—
 “this may be my last night in the world—i must not take the 
			chance. he is worthless and unworthy, but it is largely my fault. he was 
			intrusted to me by my brother on his dying bed, and i have indulged him 
			to his hurt, instead of training him up severely, and making a man of 
			him. i have violated my trust, and i must not add the sin of desertion 
			to 
			that. i have forgiven him once already, and would subject him to a 
			long and hard trial before forgiving him again, if i could live; but i 
			must not run that risk. no, i must restore the will. but if i survive the 
			duel, i will hide it away, and he will not know, and i will not tell him 
			until he reforms, and i see that his reformation is going to be 
			permanent.”
 he re-drew the will, and his ostensible nephew was heir to a fortune again.
 as he was finishing his task, tom, wearied with another brooding tramp,
 entered the house and went tiptoeing past the sitting-room door. he
 glanced in, and hurried on, for the sight of his uncle had nothing but
 terrors for him to-night. but his uncle was writing! that was unusual at
 this late hour. what could he be writing? a chill of anxiety settled down
 upon tom’s heart. did that writing concern him? he was afraid so. 
			he reflected that when ill luck begins, it does not come in sprinkles, 
			but in showers. he said he would get a glimpse of that document or know 
			the reason why. he heard some one coming, and stepped out of sight and 
			hearing. it was 
			pembroke howard. what could be 
			hatching?
 howard said, with great satisfaction:
 “everything’s right and ready. he’s gone to the 
			battle-ground with his second and the surgeon—also with his brother. 
			i’ve arranged it all with wilson—wilson’s his second. 
			we are to have three shots apiece.”
 “good! how is the moon?”
 “bright as day, nearly. perfect, for the distance—fifteen 
			yards. no wind—not a breath; hot and still.”
 “all good; all first-rate. here, pembroke, read this, and witness 
			it.”
 pembroke read and witnessed the will, then gave the old man’s hand a
 hearty shake and said:
 “now that’s right, york—but i knew you would do it. 
			you couldn’t leave that poor chap to fight along without means or 
			profession, with certain defeat before him, and i knew you 
			wouldn’t, for his father’s sake if not for his own.”
 “for his dead father’s sake i couldn’t, i know; 
			for poor percy—but you know what 
			percy was to me. but mind—tom is not to know of this unless i 
			fall to-night.”
 “i understand. i’ll keep the secret.”
 the judge put the will away, and the two started for the battle-ground. in
 another minute the will was in tom’s hands. his misery vanished, his
 feelings underwent a tremendous revulsion. he put the will carefully back
 in its place, and spread his mouth and swung his hat once, twice, three
 times around his head, in imitation of three rousing huzzas, no sound
 issuing from his lips. he fell to communing with himself excitedly and
 joyously, but every now and then he let off another volley of dumb
 hurrahs.
 he said to himself: “i’ve got the fortune again, but 
			i’ll not let on that i know about it. and this time i’m going 
			to hang on to it. i take no more risks. i’ll gamble no more, 
			i’ll drink no more, because—well, because i’ll not go 
			where there is any of that sort of thing going on, again. it’s the 
			sure way, and the only sure way; i might have thought of that 
			sooner—well, yes, if i had wanted to. but now—dear me, 
			i’ve had a 
			scare this time, and i’ll take no more chances. not a single chance 
			more. land! i persuaded myself this evening that i could fetch him around 
			without any great amount of effort, but i’ve been getting more and 
			more heavy-hearted and doubtful straight along, ever since. if he tells 
			me about this thing, all right; but if he doesn’t, i
			sha’n’t let on. i—well, i’d like to tell 
			pudd’nhead wilson, but—no, i’ll think about that; 
			perhaps i won’t.” he whirled off another dead huzza, and 
			said, “i’m reformed, and this time i’ll stay so, 
			sure!”
 he was about to close with a final grand silent demonstration, when he
 suddenly recollected that wilson had put it out of his power to pawn or
 sell the indian knife, and that he was once more in awful peril of
 exposure by his creditors for that reason. his joy collapsed utterly, and
 he turned away and moped toward the door moaning and lamenting over the
 bitterness of his luck. he dragged himself up-stairs, and brooded in his
 room a long time disconsolate and forlorn, with luigi’s indian 
			knife for a text. at last he sighed and said:
 “when i supposed these stones were glass and this ivory bone, 
			the thing hadn’t any interest for me because it hadn’t 
			any value, and couldn’t help me out of my trouble. but 
			now—why, now it is full of interest; yes, and of a sort to break 
			a body’s heart. it’s a bag of gold that has turned
 to dirt and ashes in my hands. it could save me, and save me so easily,
 and yet i’ve got to go to ruin. it’s like drowning with a 
			life-preserver in my reach. all the hard luck comes to me, and all the 
			good luck goes to other people—pudd’nhead wilson, for 
			instance; even his career has got a sort of a little start at last, and 
			what has he done to deserve it, i should like to know? yes, he has opened 
			his own road, but he isn’t content with that, but must block mine. 
			it’s a sordid, selfish world, and i wish i was out of 
			it.” he allowed the light of the candle to play upon the jewels of 
			the sheath, but the flashings and sparklings had no charm for his eye; 
			they were only just so many pangs to his heart. “i must not say 
			anything to roxy about this thing,” he said, “she is too 
			daring. she would be for 
			digging these stones out and selling them, and then—why, she would 
			be arrested and the stones traced, and then—” the thought 
			made him quake, and he hid the knife away, trembling all over and 
			glancing furtively about, like a criminal who fancies that the accuser 
			is already at hand.
 should he try to sleep? oh, no, sleep was not for him; his trouble was too
 haunting, too afflicting for that. he must have somebody to mourn with. he
 would carry his despair to roxy.
 he had heard several distant gunshots, but that sort of thing was not
 uncommon, and they had made no impression upon him. he went out at the
 back door, and turned westward. he passed wilson’s house and 
			proceeded along the lane, and presently saw several figures approaching 
			wilson’s place through the vacant lots. these were the duelists 
			returning from the fight; he thought he recognized them, but as he had 
			no desire for white people’s company, he stooped down behind the 
			fence until they were out of his way.
 roxy was feeling fine. she said:
 “whah was you, child? warn’t you in it?”
 “in what?”
 “in de duel.”
 “duel? has there been a duel?”
 “’co’se dey has. de ole jedge has be’n 
			havin’ a duel wid one o’ dem twins.”
 “great scott!” then he added to himself: “that’s 
			what made him re-make the will; he thought he might get killed, and it 
			softened him toward me. and that’s what he and howard were so 
			busy about.… oh dear, if the twin had only killed him, 
			i should be out of my—”
 “what is you mumblin’ bout, chambers? whah was you? 
			didn’t you know dey was gwyne to be a duel?”
 “no, i didn’t. the old man tried to get me to fight one with 
			count luigi, but he didn’t succeed, so i reckon he concluded to 
			patch up the family honor himself.”
 he laughed at the idea, and went rambling on with a detailed account of
 his talk with the judge, and how shocked and ashamed the judge was to find
 that he had a coward in his family. he glanced up at last, and got a 
			shock himself. roxana’s bosom was heaving with suppressed passion, 
			and she was glowering down upon him with measureless contempt written 
			in her face.
 “en you refuse’ to fight a man dat kicked you, 
			’stid o’ jumpin’ at de chance! en you ain’t 
			got no mo’ feelin’ den to come en tell me, dat fetched sich 
			a po’ low-down ornery rabbit into de worl’! pah! it make me
 sick! it’s de nigger in you, dat’s what it is. thirty-one 
			parts o’ you is white, en on’y one part nigger, en dat 
			po’ little one part is yo’ soul.
 tain’t wuth savin’; tain’t wuth totin’ out on a 
			shovel en throwin’ in de gutter. you has disgraced yo’ birth. 
			what would yo’ pa think o’ you? it’s enough to make him 
			turn in his grave.”
 the last three sentences stung tom into a fury, and he said to himself
 that if his father were only alive and in reach of assassination his
 mother would soon find that he had a very clear notion of the size of his
 indebtedness to that man, and was willing to pay it up in full, and would
 do it too, even at risk of his life; but he kept this thought to himself;
 that was safest in his mother’s present state.
 “whatever has come o’ yo’ essex blood? dat’s 
			what i can’t understan’. en it ain’t on’y jist 
			essex blood dat’s in you, not by a long sight—’deed
 it ain’t! my great-great-great-gran’father en yo’
 great-great-great-great-gran’father was ole cap’n john smith, 
			de highest blood dat ole virginny ever turned out, en his
 great-great-gran’mother or somers along back dah, was pocahontas 
			de injun queen, en her husbun’ was a nigger king outen 
			africa—en yit here you is, a slinkin’ outen a duel en 
			disgracin’ our whole line like a ornery low-down hound! yes, 
			it’s de nigger in you!”
 she sat down on her candle-box and fell into a reverie. tom did not
 disturb her; he sometimes lacked prudence, but it was not in circumstances
 of this kind, roxana’s storm went gradually down, but it died hard, 
			and even when it seemed to be quite gone, it would now and then break out 
			in a distant rumble, so to speak, in the form of muttered ejaculations. 
			one of these was, “ain’t nigger enough in him to show in 
			his finger-nails, en dat takes mighty little—yit dey’s enough 
			to paint his soul.”
 presently she muttered. “yassir, enough to paint a whole 
			thimbleful of ’em.” at last her ramblings ceased 
			altogether, and her countenance began to clear—a welcome sign to 
			tom, who had learned her moods, and knew she was on the threshold of 
			good-humor, now. he noticed that from time to time she unconsciously 
			carried her finger to the end of her nose. he looked closer and said:
 “why, mammy, the end of your nose is skinned. 
			how did that come?”
 she sent out the sort of whole-hearted peal of laughter which god had
 vouchsafed in its perfection to none but the happy angels in heaven and
 the bruised and broken black slave on the earth, and said:
 “dad fetch dat duel, i be’n in it myself.”
 “gracious! did a bullet do that?”
 “yassir, you bet it did!”
 “well, i declare! why, how did that happen?”
 “happened dis-away. i ’uz a-sett’n’ here kinder 
			dozin’ in de dark, en che-bang! goes a gun, right out dah. 
			i skips along out towards t’other end o’ de house to see 
			what’s gwyne 
			on, en stops by de ole winder on de side towards
 pudd’nhead wilson’s house dat ain’t got no sash in 
			it,—but dey ain’t none of ’em got any sashes, fur as 
			dat’s concerned,—en i stood dah in de dark en look out, en 
			dar in de moonlight, right down under me ’uz one o’ de 
			twins a-cussin’—not much, but jist a-cussin’ 
			soft—it ’uz de brown one dat ’uz cussin’, 
			’ca’se he ’uz hit in de shoulder. en doctor claypool 
			he ’uz a-workin’ at him, en pudd’nhead wilson he 
			’uz a-he’pin’, en ole jedge driscoll en pem howard 
			’uz a-standin’ out yonder a little piece waitin’ 
			for ’em to git ready agin. en treckly dey squared off en
 give de word, en bang-bang went de pistols, en de twin he say,
 ‘ouch!’—hit him on de han’ dis time,—en i 
			hear dat same bullet go spat! ag’in, de logs under de 
			winder; en de nex’ time dey shoot, de twin say, ‘ouch!’ 
			ag’in, en i done it too, ’ca’se de bullet glance’ 
			on his cheek-bone en skip up here en glance on de side o’ 
			de winder en whiz right acrost my face en tuck de hide off’n my 
			nose—why, if i’d ’a’ be’n jist a 
			inch or a inch en a half furder ’t would ’a’ tuck de 
			whole nose en disfiggered me. here’s de bullet; i hunted her 
			up.”
 “did you stand there all the time?”
 “dat’s a question to ask, ain’t it? what else would 
			i do? does i git a chance to see a duel every day?”
 “why, you were right in range! weren’t you afraid?”
 the woman gave a sniff of scorn.
 “’fraid! de smith-pocahontases ain’t 
			’fraid o’ nothin’, let alone bullets.”
 “they’ve got pluck enough, i suppose; what they lack is 
			judgment. i wouldn’t have stood there.”
 “nobody’s accusin’ you!”
 “did anybody else get hurt?”
 “yes, we all got hit ’cep’ de blon’ twin en de 
			doctor en de seconds. de jedge didn’t git hurt, but i hear 
			pudd’nhead say de bullet snip some o’ his 
			ha’r off.”
 “’george!” said tom to himself, “to come so 
			near being out of my trouble, and miss it by an inch. oh dear, dear, 
			he will live to find me out and sell me to some nigger-trader 
			yet—yes, and he would do it in a minute.” then he 
			said aloud, in a grave tone—
 “mother, we are in an awful fix.”
 roxana caught her breath with a spasm, and said—
 “chile! what you hit a body so sudden for, like dat? 
			what’s be’n en gone en happen’?”
 “well, there’s one thing i didn’t tell you. when i 
			wouldn’t fight, he tore up the will again, and—”
 roxana’s face turned a dead white, and she said—
 “now you’s done!—done forever! dat’s 
			de end. bofe un us is gwyne to starve to—”
 “wait and hear me through, can’t you! i reckon that when he 
			resolved to fight, himself, he thought he might get killed and not 
			have a chance to forgive me any more in this life, so he made the will 
			again, and i’ve seen it, and it’s all right.
			but—”
 “oh, thank goodness, den we’s safe ag’in!—safe! 
			en so what did you want to come here en talk sich 
			dreadful—”
 “hold on, i tell you, and let me finish. the swag i 
			gathered won’t half square me up, and the first thing we know, my 
			creditors—well, you know what’ll happen.”
 roxana dropped her chin, and told her son to leave her alone—she
 must think this matter out. presently she said impressively:
 “you got to go mighty keerful now, i tell you! en here’s 
			what you got to do. he didn’t git killed, en if you gives him de 
			least reason, he’ll bust de will ag’in, en dat’s de 
			las’ time, now you hear me! so—you’s got to 
			show him what you kin do in de nex’ few days. you’s got to be 
			pison good, en let him see it; you got to do everything dat’ll 
			make him b’lieve in you, en you got to sweeten aroun’ 
			ole aunt pratt, too,—she’s pow’ful strong wid de 
			jedge, en de bes’ frien’ you got. nex’, you’ll 
			go ’long away to sent louis, en dat’ll keep him in 
			yo’ favor. den you go en make a bargain wid dem people. you tell 
			’em he ain’t gwyne to live long—en dat’s de 
			fac’, too,—en tell ’em you’ll pay ’em 
			intrust, en big intrust, too,—ten per—what you call it?”
 “ten per cent. a month?”
 “dat’s it. den you take and sell yo’ truck aroun’, 
			a little at a time, en pay de intrust. how long will it 
			las’?”
 “i think there’s enough to pay the interest five or six 
			months.” 
			“den you’s all right. if he don’t die in six months, 
			dat don’t make no diff’rence—providence’ll 
			provide. you’s gwyne to be safe—if you 
			behaves.” she bent an austere eye on him and added, 
			“en you is gwyne to behave—does you know dat?”
 he laughed and said he was going to try, anyway. she did not unbend. she
 said gravely:
 “tryin’ ain’t de thing. you’s gwyne to 
			do it. you ain’t gwyne to steal a 
			pin—’ca’se it ain’t safe no mo’; 
			en you ain’t gwyne into no bad comp’ny—not even 
			once, you understand; en you ain’t gwyne to drink a 
			drop—nary single drop; en you ain’t gwyne to gamble 
			one single gamble—not one! dis ain’t what you’s 
			gwyne to try to do, it’s what you’s gwyne to 
			do. en i’ll tell you how i knows it. dis is how. 
			i’s gwyne to foller along to sent louis my own self; 
			en you’s gwyne to come to me every day o’ yo’ life, 
			en i’ll look you over; en if you fails in one single one 
			o’ dem things—jist one—i take my oath 
			i’ll 
			come straight down to dis town en tell de jedge you’s a nigger en a 
			slave—en prove it!” she paused to let her words sink 
			home. then she added, “chambers, does you b’lieve me when i 
			says dat?”
 tom was sober enough now. there was no levity in his voice when he
 answered:
 “yes, mother, i know, now, that i am reformed—and permanently.
 permanently—and beyond the reach of any human temptation.”
 “den g’ long home en begin!”
the robber robbed.
		 nothing so needs reforming as other people’s 
			 habits.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 behold, the fool saith, “put not all thine eggs in the one
 basket”—which is but a manner of saying, “scatter your
 money and your attention;” but the wise man saith, “put all
 your eggs in the one basket and—watch that 
			 basket”—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
what a time of it dawson’s landing was 
			having! all its life it had been asleep, but now it hardly got a chance 
			for a nod, so swiftly did big events and crashing surprises come along 
			in one another’s wake: friday morning, first glimpse of real 
			nobility, also grand reception at aunt patsy cooper’s, also great 
			robber-raid; friday evening, dramatic kicking of the heir of the chief 
			citizen in presence of four hundred people; saturday morning, emergence 
			as practising lawyer of the long-submerged pudd’nhead wilson; 
			saturday 
			night, duel between chief citizen and titled stranger.
 the people took more pride in the duel than in all the other 
			events put together, perhaps. it was a glory to their town to have such 
			a thing happen there. in their eyes the principals had reached 
			the summit of human honor. everybody paid homage to their names; 
			their praises were in all mouths. even the duelists’ 
			subordinates came in for a handsome share of the public 
			approbation: wherefore pudd’nhead wilson was suddenly 
			become a man of consequence. when asked to run for the mayoralty 
			saturday night he was risking defeat, but sunday morning found 
			him a made man and his success assured.
 the twins were prodigiously great, now; the town took them to its bosom
 with enthusiasm. day after day, and night after night, they went dining
 and visiting from house to house, making friends, enlarging and
 solidifying their popularity, and charming and surprising all with their
 musical prodigies, and now and then heightening the effects with samples
 of what they could do in other directions, 
			out of their stock of rare and curious accomplishments. they were so 
			pleased that they gave the regulation thirty days’ notice, the 
			required preparation for citizenship, and resolved to finish their days 
			in this pleasant place. that was the climax. the delighted community 
			rose as one man and applauded; and when the twins were asked to stand 
			for seats in the forthcoming aldermanic board, and consented, the 
			public contentment was rounded and complete.
 tom driscoll was not happy over these things; they sunk deep, and hurt all
 the way down. he hated the one twin for kicking him, and the other one for
 being the kicker’s brother.
 now and then the people wondered why nothing was heard of the raider, or
 of the stolen knife or the other plunder, but nobody was able to throw any
 light on that matter. nearly a week had drifted by, and still the thing
 remained a vexed mystery.
 on saturday constable blake and pudd’nhead wilson met on the street, 
			and tom driscoll joined them in time to open their 
			conversation for them. he said to blake—“you are not looking 
			well, blake; you seem to be annoyed about something. has anything gone 
			wrong in the detective business? i believe you fairly and justifiably 
			claim to have a pretty good reputation in that line, isn’t it 
			so?”—which made blake feel good, and look it; but tom added, 
			“for a country detective”—which made blake feel the 
			other way, and not only look it, but betray it in his voice—
 “yes, sir, i have got a reputation; and it’s as good 
			as anybody’s in the profession, too, country or no country.”
 “oh, i beg pardon; i didn’t mean any offense. what i 
			started out to ask was only about the old woman that raided the 
			town—the stoop-shouldered old woman, you know, that you said you 
			were going to catch; and i knew you would, too, because you have the 
			reputation of never boasting, and—well, you—you’ve 
			caught the old woman?”
 “d——— the old woman!”
 “why, sho! you don’t mean to say you haven’t 
			caught her?”
 “no; i haven’t caught her. if anybody could have caught her, 
			i could; but nobody couldn’t, i don’t care who he is.”
 “i am sorry, real sorry—for your sake; because, when it 
			gets around that a detective has expressed himself so confidently, 
			and then—”
 “don’t you worry, that’s all—don’t you 
			worry; and as for the town, the town needn’t worry, either. 
			she’s my meat—make yourself easy about that. i’m 
			on her track; i’ve got clues that—”
 “that’s good! now if you could get an old veteran detective 
			down from st. louis to help you find out what the clues mean, and 
			where they lead to, and then—”
 “i’m plenty veteran enough myself, and i don’t need 
			anybody’s help. i’ll have her inside of a we—inside 
			of a month. that i’ll swear to!”
 tom said carelessly—
 “i suppose that will answer—yes, that will answer. 
			but i reckon she is pretty old, and old people don’t often 
			outlive the cautious pace of the professional detective when 
			he 
			has got his clues together and is out on his still-hunt.”
 blake’s dull face flushed under this gibe, but before he 
			could set his retort in order tom had turned to wilson, and was 
			saying, with placid indifference of manner and voice—
 “who got the reward, pudd’nhead?”
 wilson winced slightly, and saw that his own turn was come.
 “what reward?”
 “why, the reward for the thief, 
			and the other one for the knife.”
 wilson answered—and rather uncomfortably, to judge by his hesitating
 fashion of delivering himself—
 “well, the—well, in fact, nobody has claimed it yet.”
 tom seemed surprised.
 “why, is that so?”
 wilson showed a trifle of irritation when he replied—
 “yes, it’s so. and what of it?”
 “oh, nothing. only i thought you had struck out a new idea, 
			and invented a scheme that was going to revolutionize the time-worn 
			and ineffectual methods of the—” he stopped, and 
			turned to blake, who was happy now that another had taken his 
			place on the gridiron: “blake, didn’t you understand him 
			to intimate that it wouldn’t be necessary for you to hunt
 the old woman down?”
 “b’george, he said he’d have thief and swag both 
			inside of three days—he did, by hokey! and that’s just 
			about a week ago. why, i said at the time that no thief and no 
			thief’s pal was going to try to pawn or sell a thing where 
			he knowed the pawnbroker could get both rewards by taking
 him into camp with the swag. it was the blessedest idea 
			that ever i struck!”
 “you’d change your mind,” said wilson, with 
			irritated bluntness, “if you knew the entire scheme 
			instead of only part of it.”
 “well,” said the constable, pensively, “i had the idea 
			that it wouldn’t work, and up to now i’m right anyway.”
 “very well, then, let it stand at that, and give it a further 
			show. it has worked at least as well as your own methods, 
			you perceive.”
 the constable hadn’t anything handy to hit back with, 
			so he discharged a discontented sniff, and said nothing.
 after the night that wilson had partly revealed his scheme at his house,
 tom had tried for several days to guess out the secret of the rest of it,
 but had failed. then it occurred to him to give roxana’s smarter 
			head a chance at it. he made up a supposititious case, and laid it before 
			her. she thought it over, and delivered her verdict upon it. tom said to
 himself, “she’s hit it, sure!” he thought he would 
			test that verdict, now, and watch wilson’s face; 
			so he said reflectively—
 “wilson, you’re not a fool—a fact of recent discovery. 
			whatever your scheme was, it had sense in it, blake’s opinion to 
			the contrary notwithstanding. i don’t ask you to reveal it, but i 
			will suppose a case—a case which will answer as a 
			starting-point for the real thing i am going to come at, and that’s 
			all i want. you offered five hundred dollars for the knife, and five 
			hundred for the thief. we will suppose, for argument’s sake, that 
			the first reward is advertised and the second
			offered by private letter to pawnbrokers and—”
 blake slapped his thigh, and cried out—
 “by jackson, he’s got you, pudd’nhead! now why 
			couldn’t i or any fool have thought of that?”
 wilson said to himself, “anybody with a reasonably good head 
			would have thought of it. i am not surprised that blake didn’t 
			detect it; i am only surprised that tom did. there is more to him than i 
			supposed.” he said nothing aloud, and tom went on:
 “very well. the thief would not suspect that there was a trap, 
			and he would bring or send the knife, and say he bought it for a song, 
			or found it in the road, or something like that, and try to collect the 
			reward, and be arrested—wouldn’t he?”
 “yes,” said wilson.
 “i think so,” said tom. “there can’t be any 
			doubt of it. have you ever seen that knife?”
 “no.”
 “has any friend of yours?”
 “not that i know of.”
 “well, i begin to think i understand why your scheme failed.”
 “what do you mean, tom? what are you driving at?” 
			asked wilson, with a dawning sense of discomfort.
 “why, that there isn’t any such knife.”
 “look here, wilson,” said blake, 
			“tom driscoll’s right, for a thousand
 dollars—if i had it.”
 wilson’s blood warmed a little, and he wondered if he had been 
			played upon by those strangers; it certainly had something of that 
			look. but what could they gain by it? he threw out that suggestion. 
			tom replied:
 “gain? oh, nothing that you would value, maybe. but they 
			are strangers making their way in a new community. is it nothing to 
			them to appear as pets of an oriental prince—at no expense? 
			is it nothing to them to be able to dazzle this poor little town with 
			thousand-dollar rewards—at no expense? wilson, there isn’t 
			any such knife, or your scheme would have fetched it to light. or if 
			there is any such knife, they’ve got it yet. i believe, myself, 
			that they’ve seen such a 
			knife, for angelo pictured it out with his pencil too swiftly and 
			handily for him to have been inventing it, and of course i can’t 
			swear that they’ve never had it; but this i’ll go bail 
			for—if they had it when they came to this town, 
			they’ve got it yet.”
 blake said—
 “it looks mighty reasonable, the way tom puts it; it 
			most certainly does.”
 tom responded, turning to leave—
 “you find the old woman, blake, and if she can’t furnish 
			the knife, go and search the twins!”
 tom sauntered away. wilson felt a good deal depressed. he hardly knew what
 to think. he was loath to withdraw his faith from the twins, and was
 resolved not to do it on the present indecisive evidence; but—well,
 he would think, and then decide how to act.
 “blake, what do you think of this matter?”
 “well, pudd’nhead, i’m bound to say i put it up 
			the way tom does. they hadn’t the knife; or if they had it, 
			they’ve got it yet.”
 the men parted. wilson said to himself:
 “i believe they had it; if it had been stolen, the scheme 
			would have restored it, that is certain. and so i believe 
			they’ve got it yet.”
 tom had no purpose in his mind when he encountered those two men. when he
 began his talk he hoped to be able to gall them a little and get a trifle
 of malicious entertainment out of it. but when he left, he left in great
 spirits, for he perceived that just by pure luck and no troublesome labor
 he had accomplished several delightful things: he had touched both men on
 a raw spot and seen them squirm; he had modified wilson’s 
			sweetness for the twins with one small bitter taste that he wouldn’t 
			be able to get out of his mouth right away; and, best of all, he had taken 
			the hated twins down a peg with the community; for blake would gossip 
			around freely, after the manner of detectives, and within a week the town 
			would be laughing at them in its sleeve for offering a gaudy reward for a 
			bauble which they either never possessed or hadn’t lost. tom was 
			very well satisfied with himself.
 tom’s behavior at home had been perfect during the entire week. 
			his uncle and aunt had seen nothing like it before. they could find no 
			fault with him anywhere.
 saturday evening he said to the judge—
 “i’ve had something preying on my mind, uncle, and as i am 
			going away, and might never see you again, i can’t bear it any 
			longer. i made you believe i was afraid to fight that italian adventurer. 
			i had to get out of it on some pretext or other, and maybe i chose badly, 
			being taken unawares, but no honorable person could consent to meet him 
			in the field, knowing what i knew about him.”
 “indeed? what was that?”
 “count luigi is a confessed assassin.”
 “incredible!”
 “it’s perfectly true. wilson detected it in his hand, 
			by palmistry, and charged him with it, and cornered him up so close 
			that he had to confess; but both twins begged us on their knees to 
			keep the secret, and swore they would lead straight lives here; and 
			it was all so pitiful that we gave our word of honor never to expose 
			them while they kept that 
			promise. you would have done it yourself, uncle.”
 “you are right, my boy; i would. a man’s secret is 
			still his own property, and sacred, when it has been surprised out of 
			him like that. you did well, and i am proud of you.” then he 
			added mournfully, “but i wish i could have been saved the 
			shame of meeting an assassin on the field of honor.”
 “it couldn’t be helped, uncle. if i had known you were 
			going to challenge him i should have felt obliged to sacrifice 
			my pledged word in order to stop it, but wilson couldn’t be 
			expected to do otherwise than keep silent.”
 “oh, no; wilson did right, and is in no way to blame. tom, 
			tom, you have lifted a heavy load from my heart; i was stung 
			to the very soul when i seemed to have discovered that i had 
			a coward in my family.”
 “you may imagine what it cost me to assume such a part, 
			uncle.”
 “oh, i know it, poor boy, i know it. and i can understand how 
			much it has cost you to remain under that unjust stigma to this time.
			but it is all right now, and no harm is done. you have restored my 
			comfort of mind, and with it your own; and both of us had 
			suffered enough.”
 the old man sat awhile plunged in thought; then he looked up with a
 satisfied light in his eye, and said: “that this assassin 
			should have put the affront upon me of letting me meet him on the 
			field of honor as if he were a gentleman is a matter which i will 
			presently settle—but not now. i will not shoot him until 
			after election. i see a way to ruin them both before; i will attend 
			to that first. neither of them shall be elected, that i promise. 
			you are sure that the fact that he is an assassin has not got 
			abroad?”
 “perfectly certain of it, sir.”
 “it will be a good card. i will fling a hint at it from 
			the stump on the polling-day. it will sweep the ground from 
			under both of them.”
 “there’s not a doubt of it. it will finish them.”
 “that and outside work among the voters will, to a certainty. 
			i want you to come 
			down here by and by and work privately among the rag-tag and bobtail. 
			you shall spend money among them; i will furnish it.”
 another point scored against the detested twins! really it was a great day
 for tom. he was encouraged to chance a parting shot, now, at the same
 target, and did it.
 “you know that wonderful indian knife that the twins have been 
			making such a to-do about? well, there’s no track or trace of it 
			yet; so the town is beginning to sneer and gossip and laugh. half the 
			people believe they never had any such knife, the other half believe 
			they had it and have got it still. i’ve heard twenty people 
			talking like that to-day.”
 yes, tom’s blemishless week had restored him to the favor 
			of his aunt and uncle.
 his mother was satisfied with him, too. privately, she believed she was
 coming to love him, but she did not say so. she told him to go along to
 st. louis, now, and she would get ready and follow. then she smashed her
 whisky bottle and said—
 “dah now! i’s a-gwyne to make you 
			walk as straight as a string, chambers, en so i’s bown’ you 
			ain’t gwyne to git no bad example out o’ yo’ mammy. i 
			tole you you couldn’t go into no bad comp’ny. well, 
			you’s gwyne into my comp’ny, en i’s gwyne to 
			fill de bill. now, den, trot along, trot along!”
 tom went aboard one of the big transient boats that night with his heavy
 satchel of miscellaneous plunder, and slept the sleep of the unjust, which
 is serener and sounder than the other kind, as we know by the hanging-eve
 history of a million rascals. but when he got up in the morning, luck was
 against him again: a brother-thief had robbed him while he slept, and gone
 ashore at some intermediate landing.
sold down the river.
			 if you pick up a starving dog and make him prosperous, he
 	 will not bite you. this is the principal difference between
 	 a dog and a man.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 we know all about the habits of the ant, we know all about
 	 the habits of the bee, but we know nothing at all about the
 	 habits of the oyster. it seems almost certain that we have
 	 been choosing the wrong time for studying the 
			 oyster.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
when roxana arrived, she found her son in such 
			despair and misery that her heart was touched and her motherhood rose up 
			strong in her. he was ruined past hope, now; his destruction would be 
			immediate and sure, and he would be an outcast and friendless. that was 
			reason enough for a mother to love a child; so she loved him, and told him 
			so. it made him wince, secretly—for she was a “nigger.” 
			that he was one himself was far from reconciling him to that despised 
			race.
 roxana poured out endearments upon him, to which he responded
 uncomfortably, but as well as he could. and she tried to comfort him, but
 that was not possible. these intimacies quickly became horrible to him,
 and within the hour he began to try to get up courage enough to tell her
 so, and require that they be discontinued or very considerably modified.
 but he was afraid of her; and besides, there came a lull, now, for she had
 begun to think. she was trying to invent a saving plan. finally she
 started up, and said she had found a way out. tom was almost suffocated by
 the joy of this sudden good news. roxana said:
 “here is de plan, en she’ll win, sure. i’s a nigger, 
			en nobody ain’t gwyne to doubt it dat hears me talk. i’s 
			wuth six hund’d dollahs. take en sell me, en pay off dese 
			gamblers.”
 tom was dazed. he was not sure he had heard aright. he was dumb for a
 moment; then he said:
 “do you mean that you would be sold into slavery to save me?”
 “ain’t you my chile? en does you know 
			anything dat a 
			mother won’t do for her chile? day ain’t nothin’ a 
			white mother won’t do for her chile. who made ’em so? de 
			lord done it. en who made de niggers? de lord made ’em. in
 de inside, mothers is all de same. de good lord he made ’em so. 
			i’s gwyne to be sole into slavery, en in a year you’s gwyne 
			to buy yo’ ole mammy free ag’in. i’ll show you how. 
			dat’s de plan.”
 tom’s hopes began to rise, and his spirits along with them. 
			he said—
 “it’s lovely of you, mammy—it’s just—”
 “say it ag’in! en keep on sayin’ 
			it!
			it’s all de pay a body kin want in dis worl’, en it’s 
			mo’ den enough. laws bless you, honey, when i’s slavin’ 
			aroun’, en dey ’buses me, if i knows you’s 
			a-sayin’ dat, ’way off yonder somers, it’ll heal up all 
			de sore places, en i kin stan’ ’em.”
 “i do say it again, mammy, and i’ll keep on 
			saying it, too. but how am i going to sell you? 
			you’re free, you know.”
 “much diff’rence dat make! white folks ain’t 
			partic’lar. de law kin sell me now if dey tell me to leave de state 
			in six months 
			en i don’t go. you draw up a paper—bill 
			o’ sale—en put it ’way off yonder, down in de middle 
			o’ kaintuck somers, en sign some names to it, en say you’ll
 sell me cheap ’ca’se you’s hard up; you’ll find 
			you ain’t gwyne to have no trouble. you take me up de country a 
			piece, en sell me on a farm; dem people ain’t gwyne to ask no 
			questions if i’s a bargain.”
 tom forged a bill of sale and sold his mother to an arkansas 
			cotton-planter for a trifle over six hundred dollars. he did not want to 
			commit this treachery, but luck threw the man in his way, and this saved 
			him the necessity of going up country to hunt up a purchaser, with the 
			added risk of having to answer a lot of questions, whereas this planter 
			was so pleased with roxy that he asked next to none at all. besides, the 
			planter insisted that roxy wouldn’t know where she was, at first, 
			and that by the time she found out she would already have become 
			contented. and tom argued with himself that it was an immense advantage 
			for roxy to have a master who was so pleased with 
			her, as this planter manifestly was. in almost no time his flowing 
			reasonings carried him to the point of even half believing he was 
			doing roxy a splendid surreptitious service in selling her “down 
			the river.” and then he kept diligently saying to himself all the 
			time: “it’s for only a year. in a year i buy her free again; 
			she’ll keep that in mind, and it’ll reconcile her.” 
			yes; the little deception could do no harm, and everything would come 
			out right and pleasant in the end, any way. by agreement, the 
			conversation in roxy’s presence was all about the man’s 
			“upcountry” farm, and how pleasant a place it was, and how 
			happy the slaves were there; so poor roxy was entirely deceived; and 
			easily, for she was not dreaming that her own son could be guilty of 
			treason to a mother who, in voluntarily going into slavery—slavery 
			of any kind, mild or severe, or of any duration, brief or long—was 
			making a sacrifice for him compared with which death would have been a 
			poor and commonplace one. she lavished tears and loving caresses upon 
			him privately, and then went away with 
			her owner—went away broken-hearted, and yet proud of what she was 
			doing, and glad it was in her power to do it.
 tom squared his accounts, and resolved to keep to the very letter of his
 reform, and never to put that will in jeopardy again. he had three hundred
 dollars left. according to his mother’s plan, he was to put that 
			safely away, and add her half of his pension to it monthly. in one year 
			this fund would buy her free again.
 for a whole week he was not able to sleep well, so much the villainy which
 he had played upon his trusting mother preyed upon his rag of a 
			conscience; but after that he began to get comfortable again, and was 
			presently able to sleep like any other miscreant.
 the boat bore roxy away from st. louis at four in the afternoon, and she
 stood on the lower guard abaft the paddle-box and watched tom through a
 blur of tears until he melted into the throng of people and disappeared;
 then she looked no more, but 
			sat there on a coil of cable crying till far into the night. when she 
			went to her foul steerage-bunk at last, between the clashing engines, 
			it was not to sleep, but only to wait for the morning, and, waiting, 
			grieve.
 it had been imagined that she “would not know,” and 
			would think she was traveling up stream. she! why, she had been 
			steamboating for years. at dawn she got up and went listlessly and 
			sat down on the cable-coil again. she passed many a snag whose 
			“break” could have told her a thing to break her
 heart, for it showed a current moving in the same direction that 
			the boat was going; but her thoughts were elsewhere, and she did 
			not notice. but at last the roar of a bigger and nearer break than 
			usual brought her out of her torpor, and she looked up, and her 
			practised eye fell upon that telltale rush of water. for one 
			moment her petrified gaze fixed itself there. then her head dropped 
			upon her breast, and she said—
 “oh, de good lord god have mercy on po’ sinful 
			me—i’s sole down de river!”
the judge utters dire prophecy.
		 even popularity can be overdone. in rome, along at first,
 you are full of regrets that michelangelo died; but by and
 by you only regret that you didn’t see him do 
			 it.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
july . statistics show that we lose more fools on this day
 	 than in all the other days of the year put together. this
 	 proves, by the number left in stock, that one fourth of july
 	 per year is now inadequate, the country has grown 
			 so.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
the summer weeks dragged by, and then the 
			political campaign opened—opened in pretty warm fashion, and waxed 
			hotter and hotter daily. the twins threw themselves into it with their 
			whole heart, for their self-love was engaged. their popularity, so general 
			at first, had suffered afterward; mainly because they had been 
			too popular, and so a natural reaction had followed. besides, 
			it had been diligently whispered around that it 
			was curious—indeed, very curious—that that wonderful 
			knife of theirs did not turn up—if it was so valuable, 
			or if it had ever existed. and with the whisperings went 
			chucklings and nudgings and winks, and such things have an effect. 
			the twins considered that success in the election would reinstate them, 
			and that defeat would work them irreparable damage. therefore they 
			worked hard, but not harder than judge driscoll and tom worked against 
			them in the closing days of the canvas. tom’s conduct had remained 
			so letter-perfect during two whole months, now, that his uncle not only 
			trusted him with money with which to persuade voters, but trusted him to 
			go and get it himself out of the safe in the private sitting-room.
 the closing speech of the campaign was made by judge driscoll, 
			and he made it against both of the foreigners. it was disastrously 
			effective. he poured out rivers of ridicule upon them, and forced 
			the big mass-meeting to laugh and applaud. he scoffed at them as 
			adventurers, mountebanks, side-show riff-raff, dime museum freaks; 
			he assailed 
			their showy titles with measureless derision; he said 
			they were back-alley barbers disguised as nobilities, 
			peanut peddlers masquerading as gentlemen, organ-grinders bereft 
			of their brother monkey. at last he stopped and stood still. he
 waited until the place had become absolutely silent and expectant, 
			then he delivered his deadliest shot; delivered it 
			with ice-cold seriousness and deliberation, with a significant 
			emphasis upon the closing words: he said that he believed that 
			the reward offered for the lost knife was humbug and buncombe, 
			and that its owner would know where to find it whenever he 
			should have occasion to assassinate somebody.
 then he stepped from the stand, leaving a startled and impressive hush
 behind him instead of the customary explosion of cheers and party cries.
 the strange remark flew far and wide over the town and made an
 extraordinary sensation. everybody was asking, “what could he 
			mean by that?” and everybody went on asking that question, 
			but in vain; for the judge only said he knew what he was talking 
			about, and stopped there; tom said he hadn’t any idea what his 
			uncle meant, and wilson, whenever he was asked what he thought it meant, 
			parried the question by asking the questioner what he thought 
			it meant.
 wilson was elected, the twins were defeated—crushed, in fact, and
 left forlorn and substantially friendless. tom went back to st. louis
 happy.
 dawson’s landing had a week of repose, now, and it needed it. 
			but it was in an expectant state, for the air was full of rumors of 
			a new duel. judge driscoll’s election labors had prostrated him,
			but it was said that as soon as he was well enough to entertain a 
			challenge he would get one from count luigi.
 the brothers withdrew entirely from society, and nursed their humiliation
 in privacy. they avoided the people, and went out for exercise only late
 at night, when the streets were deserted.
roxana commands.
		 gratitude and treachery are merely the two extremities of
 the same procession. you have seen all of it that is worth
 staying for when the band and the gaudy officials have gone
 by.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
thanksgiving day. let all give humble, hearty, and
 		sincere thanks, now, but the turkeys. in the island of fiji
 		they do not use turkeys; they use plumbers. it does not
 		become you and me to sneer at fiji.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
the friday after the election was a rainy one 
			in st. louis. it rained all day long, and rained hard, apparently trying 
			its best to wash that soot-blackened town white, but of course not 
			succeeding. toward midnight tom driscoll arrived at his lodgings from 
			the theatre in the heavy downpour, and closed his umbrella and let 
			himself in; but when he would have shut the door, he found that there was 
			another person entering—doubtless another lodger; this person 
			closed the door 
			and tramped up-stairs behind tom. tom found his door in the dark, and 
			entered it and turned up the gas. when he faced about, lightly whistling, 
			he saw the back of a man. the man was closing and locking his door for 
			him. his whistle faded out and he felt uneasy. the man turned around, a 
			wreck of shabby old clothes, sodden with rain and all a-drip, and showed 
			a black face under an old slouch hat. tom was frightened. he tried to 
			order the man out, but the words refused to come, and the other man got 
			the start. he said, in a low voice—
 “keep still—i’s yo’ mother!”
 tom sunk in a heap on a chair, and gasped out—
 “it was mean of me, and base—i know it; but i meant it for 
			the best, i did indeed—i can swear it.”
 roxana stood awhile looking mutely down on him while he writhed in shame
 and went on incoherently babbling self-accusations mixed with pitiful
 attempts at explanation and palliation of his crime; then she seated
 herself and took off her hat, and her unkept masses 
			of long brown hair tumbled down about her shoulders.
 “it ain’t no fault o’ yo’n dat dat 
			ain’t gray,” she said sadly, noticing the hair.
 “i know it, i know it! i’m a scoundrel. but i swear i meant 
			it for the best. it was a mistake, of course, but i thought it was 
			for the best, i truly did.”
 roxana began to cry softly, and presently words began to find their way
 out between her sobs. they were uttered lamentingly, rather than 
			angrily—
 “sell a pusson down de river—down the 
			river!—for de bes’! i wouldn’t treat a dog so! 
			i is all broke down en wore out, now, en so i reckon it ain’t in 
			me to storm aroun’ no mo’, like i used to when i ’uz
 trompled on en ’bused. i don’t know—but maybe 
			it’s so. leastways, i’s suffered so much dat mournin’ 
			seem to come mo’ handy to me now den stormin’.”
 these words should have touched tom driscoll, but if they did, that effect
 was obliterated by a stronger one—one which removed the heavy weight
 of fear which lay upon him, 
			and gave his crushed spirit a most grateful rebound, and filled all his 
			small soul with a deep sense of relief. but he kept prudently still, and 
			ventured no comment. there was a voiceless interval of some duration, 
			now, in which no sounds were heard but the beating of the rain upon the 
			panes, the sighing and complaining of the winds, and now and then a 
			muffled sob from roxana. the sobs became more and more infrequent, and at 
			last ceased. then the refugee began to talk again:
 “shet down dat light a little. more. more yit. a pusson dat 
			is hunted don’t like de light. dah—dat’ll do. i kin see 
			whah you is, en dat’s enough. i’s gwine to tell you de tale, 
			en cut it jes as short as i kin, en den i’ll tell you what 
			you’s got to do. dat man dat bought me ain’t a bad
 man; he’s good enough, as planters goes; en if he could 
			’a’ had his way i’d ’a’ be’n a 
			house servant 
			in his fambly en be’n comfortable: but his wife she was a yank, en 
			not right down good lookin’, en she riz up agin me straight off; so 
			den dey sent me out to de quarter 
			’mongst de common fiel’ 
			han’s. dat woman warn’t satisfied even wid dat, but she 
			worked up de overseer ag’in’ me, she ’uz dat jealous 
			en hateful; so de overseer he had me out befo’ day in de 
			mawnin’s en worked me de whole long day as long as dey ’uz 
			any light to see by; en many’s de lashin’s i got 
			’ca’se i couldn’t come up to de work o’ de 
			stronges’. dat overseer wuz a yank, too, outen new englan’, en 
			anybody down south kin tell you what dat mean. dey knows how to 
			work a nigger to death, en 
			dey knows how to whale ’em, 
			too—whale ’em till dey backs is welted like a washboard. 
			’long at fust my marster say de good word for me to de overseer, 
			but dat ’uz bad for me; for de mistis she fine it out, en arter 
			dat i jist ketched it at every turn—dey warn’t no mercy for 
			me no mo’.”
 tom’s heart was fired—with fury 
			against the planter’s wife; and he said to himself, 
			“but for that meddlesome fool, everything would have gone 
			all right.” he added a deep and bitter curse against her.
 the expression of this sentiment was fiercely written in his face, and
 stood thus revealed to 
			roxana by a white glare of lightning which turned
 the somber dusk of the room into dazzling day at that moment. she was
 pleased—pleased and grateful; for did not that expression show that
 her child was capable of grieving for his mother’s wrongs and of 
			feeling resentment toward her persecutors?—a thing which she had 
			been doubting. but her flash of happiness was only a flash, and went out 
			again and left her spirit dark; for she said to herself, “he sole 
			me down de river—he can’t feel for a body long: dis’ll 
			pass en go.” then she took up her tale again.
 “’bout ten days ago i ’uz sayin’ to myself dat 
			i couldn’t las’ many mo’ weeks i ’uz so wore out 
			wid de awful work en de lashin’s, en so downhearted en misable. en 
			i didn’t care no mo’, nuther—life warn’t
 wuth noth’n’ to me, if i got to go on like dat. well, when 
			a body is in a frame o’ mine like dat, what do a body care what a 
			body do? dey was a little sickly nigger wench ’bout ten year ole 
			dat ’uz good to me, en hadn’t no mammy, po’ thing, en 
			i loved her en she loved me; en she come out whah i ’uz 
			workin ’en she had 
			a roasted tater, en tried to slip it to me,—robbin’ herself, 
			you see, ’ca’se she knowed de overseer didn’t gimme 
			enough to eat,—en he ketched her at it, en give her a lick acrost 
			de back wid his stick, which ’uz as thick as a broom-handle, en 
			she drop’ screamin’ on de groun’, en squirmin’ 
			en wallerin’ aroun’ in de dust like a spider dat’s 
			got crippled. i couldn’t stan’ it. all de hell-fire dat 
			’uz ever in my heart flame’ up, en i snatch de stick outen 
			his han’ en laid him flat. he laid dah moanin’ en 
			cussin’, en all out of his head, you know, en de niggers ’uz 
			plumb sk’yred to death. dey gathered roun’ him to 
			he’p him, en i jumped on his hoss en took out for de river 
			as tight as i could go. i knowed what dey would do wid me. soon as he got 
			well he would start in en work me to death if marster let him; en if 
			dey didn’t do dat, they’d sell me furder down de river, 
			en dat’s de same thing. so i ’lowed to drown myself en git 
			out o’ my troubles. it ’uz gitt’n’ towards dark. 
			i ’uz at de river in two minutes. den i see a canoe, en i says dey 
			ain’t no use to drown myself tell i got to; so i ties de hoss in de 
			edge o’ de timber en shove out down de river, keepin’ in 
			under de shelter o’ de bluff bank en prayin’ for de dark to 
			shet down quick. i had a pow’ful good start, ’ca’se de 
			big house ’uz three mile back f’om de river en on’y de
 work-mules to ride dah on, en on’y niggers to ride ’em, en
			dey 
			warn’t gwine to hurry—dey’d gimme all de 
			chance dey could. befo’ a body could go to de house en back it 
			would be long pas’ dark, en dey couldn’t track de
 hoss en fine out which way i went tell mawnin’, en de niggers 
			would tell ’em all de lies dey could ’bout it.
 “well, de dark come, en i went on a-spinnin’ down de river. 
			i paddled mo’n two hours, den i warn’t worried no mo’, 
			so i quit paddlin, en floated down de current, considerin’ 
			what i ’uz gwine to do if i didn’t have to drown myself. i 
			made up some plans, en floated along, turnin’ ’em over in my
 mine. well, when it ’uz a little pas’ midnight, as i reckoned, 
			en i had come fifteen or twenty mile, i see de lights o’ a steamboat 
			layin’ at de bank, whah dey warn’t no town en no woodyard, 
			en putty soon i ketched de shape 
			o’ de chimbly-tops ag’in’ de stars, en 
			den
			good 
			gracious me, i ’most jumped out o’ my skin for joy! it 
			’uz de gran’ mogul—i ’uz chambermaid on her 
			for eight seasons in de cincinnati en orleans trade. i slid ’long 
			pas’—don’t see nobody stirrin’ nowhah—hear 
			’em a-hammerin’ away in de engine-room, den i knowed what de 
			matter was—some o’ de machinery’s broke. i got 
			asho’ below de boat and turn’ de canoe loose, den i goes 
			’long up, en dey ’uz jes one plank out, en i step’
 ’board de boat. it ’uz pow’ful hot, deckhan’s en 
			roustabouts ’uz sprawled aroun’ asleep on de 
			fo’cas’l’, de second mate, jim bangs, he sot dah on de
 bitts wid his head down, asleep—’ca’se dat’s de 
			way de second mate stan’ de cap’n’s watch!—en de 
			ole watchman, billy hatch, he ’uz a-noddin’ on de 
			companionway;—en i knowed ’em all; ’en, lan’, 
			but dey did look good! i says to myself, i wished old marster’d 
			come along now en try to take me—bless yo’ 
			heart, i’s ’mong frien’s, i is. so i tromped right 
			along ’mongst ’em, en went up on de b’iler deck en 
			’way back aft to de ladies’ cabin guard, en sot down dah in 
			de 
			same cheer dat i’d sot in ’mos’ a hund’d 
			million times, i reckon; en it ’uz jist home ag’in, 
			i tell you!
 “in ’bout an hour i heard de ready-bell jingle, en den de 
			racket begin. putty soon i hear de gong strike. ‘set her back on 
			de outside,’ i says to myself—‘i reckon i knows dat 
			music!’ i hear de gong ag’in. ‘come ahead on
 de inside,’ i says. gong ag’in. ‘stop de outside.’ 
			gong ag’in. ‘come ahead on de outside—now we’s 
			pinted for sent louis, en i’s outer de woods en ain’t got to 
			drown myself at all.’ i knowed de mogul ’uz in de sent
 louis trade now, you see. it ’uz jes fair daylight when we passed 
			our plantation, en i seed a gang o’ niggers en white folks 
			huntin’ up en down de sho’, en troublin’ deyselves a 
			good deal ’bout me; but i warn’t troublin’ myself 
			none ’bout dem.
 “’bout dat time sally jackson, dat used to be my second 
			chambermaid en ’uz head chambermaid now, she come out on de guard, 
			en ’uz pow’ful glad to see me, en so ’uz all de 
			officers; en i tole ’em i’d got kidnapped en sole down de 
			river, en dey made me up 
			twenty dollahs en give it to me, en sally
 she rigged me out wid good clo’es, en when i got here i went 
			straight to whah you used to wuz, en den i come to dis house, en dey say 
			you’s away but ’spected back every day; so i didn’t 
			dast to go down de river to dawson’s, ’ca’se i might 
			miss you.
 “well, las’ monday i ’uz pass’n’ 
			by one o’ dem places in fourth street whah deh sticks up 
			runaway-nigger bills, en he’ps to ketch ’em, en i 
			seed my marster! i ’mos’ flopped down on de 
			groun’, i felt so gone. he had his back to me, en 
			’uz talkin’ to de man en givin’ him some 
			bills—nigger-bills, i reckon, en i’se de nigger. 
			he’s offerin’ a reward—dat’s it. 
			ain’t i right, don’t you reckon?”
 tom had been gradually sinking into a state of ghastly terror, and he said
 to himself, now: “i’m lost, no matter what turn things 
			take! this man has said to me that he thinks there was something 
			suspicious about that sale. he said he had a letter from a passenger on 
			the grand mogul saying that roxy came here on that boat and that 
			everybody on board knew all about the case; so 
			he says that her coming here instead of flying to a free state looks bad 
			for me, and that if i don’t find her for him, and that pretty soon, 
			he will make trouble for me. i never believed that story; i couldn’t 
			believe she would be so dead to all motherly instincts as to come here, 
			knowing the risk she would run of getting me into irremediable trouble. 
			and after all, here she is! and i stupidly swore i would help him find 
			her, thinking it was a perfectly safe thing to promise. if i venture to 
			deliver her up, she—she—but how can i help myself? i’ve 
			got to do that or pay the money, and where’s the money to come from? 
			i—i—well, i should think that if he would swear to treat her 
			kindly hereafter—and she says, herself, that he is a good 
			man—and if he would swear to never allow her to be overworked, 
			or ill fed, or—”
 a flash of lightning exposed tom’s pallid face, drawn and rigid 
			with these worrying thoughts. roxana spoke up sharply now, and there 
			was apprehension in her voice—
 “turn up dat light! i want to see yo’ face better. 
			dah now—lemme look at you. 
			chambers, you’s as white as 
			yo’ shirt! has you see dat man? has he be’n to 
			see you?”
 “ye-s.”
 “when?”
 “monday noon.”
 “monday noon! was he on my track?”
 “he—well, he thought he was. that is, he hoped he was. 
			this is the bill you saw.” he took it out of his pocket.
 “read it to me!”
 she was panting with excitement, and there was a dusky glow in her eyes
 that tom could not translate with certainty, but there seemed to be
 something threatening about it. the handbill had the usual rude woodcut of
 a turbaned negro woman running, with the customary bundle on a stick over
 her shoulder, and the heading in bold type, “$ 
			reward.” tom read the bill aloud—at 
			least the part that described roxana and named the master and his st. 
			louis address and the address of the fourth-street agency; but he left out 
			the item that applicants for the reward might also apply to mr. 
			thomas driscoll.
 “gimme de bill!”
 tom had folded it and was putting it in his pocket. he felt a chilly
 streak creeping down his back, but said as carelessly as he could—
 “the bill? why, it isn’t any use to you, you can’t 
			read it. what do you want with it?”
 “gimme de bill!” tom gave it to her, but with a reluctance 
			which he could not entirely disguise. “did you read it 
			all to me?”
 “certainly i did.”
 “hole up yo’ han’ en swah to it.”
 tom did it. roxana put the bill carefully away in her pocket, with her
 eyes fixed upon tom’s face all the while; then she said—
 “yo’s lyin’!”
 “what would i want to lie about it for?”
 “i don’t know—but you is. dat’s my opinion, 
			anyways. but nemmine ’bout dat. when i seed dat man i ’uz 
			dat sk’yerd dat i could sca’cely wobble home. den i give a 
			nigger man a dollar for dese clo’es, en i ain’t be’n 
			in a house sence, night ner day, till now. i blacked my face en laid
 hid in de cellar of a 
			ole house dat’s burnt down, 
			daytimes, en robbed de sugar hogsheads en grain sacks on de 
			wharf, nights, to git somethin’ to eat, en never dast to try 
			to buy noth’n’, en i’s ’mos’ starved. 
			en i never dast to come near dis place till dis rainy night, when 
			dey ain’t no people roun’ sca’cely. but to-night i 
			be’n a-stannin’ in de dark alley ever sence
 night come, waitin’ for you to go by. en here i is.”
 she fell to thinking. presently she said—
 “you seed dat man at noon, las’ monday?”
 “yes.” 
 “i seed him de middle o’ dat arternoon. he 
			hunted you up, didn’t he?”
 “yes.”
 “did he give you de bill dat time?”
 “no, he hadn’t got it printed yet.”
 roxana darted a suspicious glance at him.
 “did you he’p him fix up de bill?”
 tom cursed himself for making that stupid blunder, and tried to rectify it
 by saying he remembered, now, that it was at noon monday that the 
			man gave him the bill. roxana said—
 “you’s lyin’ ag’in, sho.” 
			then she straightened up and raised her finger:
 “now den! i’s gwine to ask you a question, en i wants to 
			know how you’s gwine to git aroun’ it. you knowed he 
			’uz arter me; en if you run off, ’stid o’ stayin’ 
			here to he’p him, he’d know dey ’uz somethin’ 
			wrong ’bout dis business, en den he would inquire ’bout you, 
			en dat would take him to yo’ uncle, en yo’ uncle would read 
			de bill en see dat you be’n sellin’ a free nigger down de 
			river, en you know him, i reckon! he’d t’ar up de will
 en kick you outen de house. now, den, you answer me dis question: 
			hain’t you tole dat man dat i would be sho’ to come here, 
			en den you would fix it so he could set a trap en ketch me?”
 tom recognized that neither lies nor arguments could help him any 
			longer—he was in a vise, with the screw turned on, and out of 
			it there was no budging. his face began to take on an ugly look, and 
			presently he said, with a snarl—
 “well, what could i do? you see, yourself, 
			that i was in his grip 
 and couldn’t get out.”
 roxy scorched him with a scornful gaze awhile, then she said—
 “what could you do? you could be judas to yo’ own mother 
			to save yo’ wuthless hide! would anybody b’lieve it? 
			no—a dog couldn’t! you is de low-downest orneriest 
			hound dat was ever pup’d into dis worl’—en
 i’s ’sponsible for it!”—and she spat on him.
 he made no effort to resent this. roxy reflected a moment, then she 
			said—
 “now i’ll tell you what you’s gwine to do. you’s 
			gwine to give dat man de money dat you’s got laid up, en make 
			him wait till you kin go to de judge en git de res’ en buy me 
			free agin.”
 “thunder! what are you thinking of? go and ask him for three hundred
 dollars and odd? what would i tell him i want with it, pray?”
 roxy’s answer was delivered in a serene and level voice—
 “you’ll tell him you’s sole me to pay yo’
			gamblin’ debts en dat you lied to me en was a villain, 
			en dat i ’quires you to git dat money en buy me
 back ag’in.”
 “why, you’ve gone stark mad! he would tear the will to shreds 
			in a minute—don’t you know that?”
 “yes, i does.”
 “then you don’t believe i’m 
			idiot enough to go to him, do you?”
 “i don’t b’lieve nothin’ ’bout 
			it—i knows you’s a-goin’. i knows it
 ’ca’se you knows dat if you don’t raise dat 
			money i’ll go to him myself, en den he’ll sell 
			you down de river, en you kin see how you like it!”
 tom rose, trembling and excited, and there was an evil light in his eye.
 he strode to the door and said he must get out of this suffocating place
 for a moment and clear his brain in the fresh air so that he could
 determine what to do. the door wouldn’t open. roxy smiled grimly, 
			and said—
 “i’s got de key, honey—set down. you needn’t 
			cle’r up yo’ brain none to fine out what you gwine to 
			do—i knows what you’s gwine to do.” 
			tom sat down and began to pass his 
			hands through his hair with a helpless and desperate air. roxy said, 
			“is dat man in dis house?”
 tom glanced up with a surprised expression, and asked—
 “what gave you such an idea?”
 “you done it. gwine out to cle’r yo’ brain! in de fust 
			place you ain’t got none to cle’r, en in de second place 
			yo’ ornery eye tole on you. you’s de low-downest hound dat 
			ever—but i done tole you dat befo’. now den, dis is friday. 
			you kin fix it up wid dat man, en tell him you’s gwine away to git 
			de res’ o’ de money, en dat you’ll be back wid it 
			nex’ tuesday, or maybe wednesday. you understan’?”
 tom answered sullenly— 
		 “yes.”
 “en when you gits de new bill o’ sale dat sells me to my 
			own self, take en send it in de mail to mr. pudd’nhead wilson, 
			en write on de back dat he’s to keep it tell i come. 
			you understan’?”
 “yes.”
 “dat’s all den. take yo’ umbreller, 
			en put on yo’ hat.”
 “why?”
 “beca’se you’s gwine to see me home to de wharf. 
			you see dis knife? i’s toted it aroun’ sence de day i 
			seed dat man en bought dese clo’es en it. if he ketch me, 
			i’s gwine to kill myself wid it. now start along, en go
 sof’, en lead de way; en if you gives a sign in dis house, 
			or if anybody comes up to you in de street, i’s gwine to 
			jam it right into you. chambers, does you b’lieve me when 
			i says dat?”
 “it’s no use to bother me with that question. 
			i know your word’s good.”
 “yes, it’s diff’rent from yo’n! shet de light 
			out en move along—here’s de key.”
 they were not followed. tom trembled every time a late straggler brushed
 by them on the street, and half expected to feel the cold steel in his
 back. roxy was right at his heels and always in reach. after tramping a
 mile they reached a wide vacancy on the deserted wharves, and in this dark
 and rainy desert they parted.
 as tom trudged home his mind was full of dreary thoughts and wild plans;
 but at last he said to himself, wearily—
 “there is but the one way out. i must follow her plan. but 
			with a variation—i will not ask for the money and ruin myself; 
			i will rob the old skinflint.”
the prophecy realized.
			 few things are harder to put up with than the annoyance of
 	 a good example.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
 	 it were not best that we should all think alike; it is
 	 difference of opinion that makes horse-races.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
dawson’s landing was comfortably 
			finishing its season of dull repose and waiting patiently for the duel. 
			count luigi was waiting, too; but not patiently, rumor said. sunday came, 
			and luigi insisted on having his challenge conveyed. wilson carried it. 
			judge driscoll declined to fight with an assassin—“that 
			is,” he added significantly, “in the field of honor.”
 elsewhere, of course, he would be ready. wilson tried to convince him that
 if he had been present himself when angelo told about the homicide
 committed by luigi, he would not have considered the act discreditable to
 luigi; but the obstinate old man was not to be moved.
 wilson went back to his principal and reported the failure of his mission.
 luigi was incensed, and asked how it could be that the old gentleman, who
 was by no means dull-witted, held his trifling nephew’s evidence 
			and inferences to be of more value than wilson’s. but wilson 
			laughed, and said—
 “that is quite simple; that is easily explicable. i am not his 
			doll—his baby—his infatuation: his nephew is. the judge and 
			his late wife never had any children. the judge and his wife were past 
			middle age when this treasure fell into their lap. one must make 
			allowances for a parental instinct that has been starving for 
			twenty-five or thirty years. it is famished, it is crazed with hunger 
			by that time, and will be entirely satisfied with anything that comes 
			handy; its taste is atrophied, it can’t tell mud-cat from shad. 
			a devil born to a young couple is measurably recognizable by them as 
			a devil before long, but a devil adopted by an old couple is an angel 
			to them, and remains so, through thick 
			and thin. tom is this old man’s angel; he is infatuated with him. 
			tom can persuade him into things which other people can’t—not 
			all things; i don’t mean that, but a good many—particularly 
			one class of things: the things that create or abolish personal 
			partialities or prejudices in the old man’s mind. the old man liked 
			both of you. tom conceived a hatred for you. that was enough; it turned 
			the old man around at once. the oldest and strongest friendship must go 
			to the ground when one of these late-adopted darlings throws a brick at 
			it.”
 “it’s a curious philosophy,” said luigi.
 “it ain’t a philosophy at all—it’s a fact. and 
			there is something pathetic and beautiful about it, too. i think there is 
			nothing more pathetic than to see one of these poor old childless 
			couples taking a menagerie of yelping little worthless dogs to their 
			hearts; and then adding some cursing and squawking parrots and a 
			jackass-voiced macaw; and next a couple of hundred screeching 
			song-birds, and presently some fetid guinea-pigs and rabbits, and a 
			howling colony of cats. it 
			is all a groping and ignorant effort to construct out of base metal 
			and brass filings, so to speak, something to take the place of that 
			golden treasure denied them by nature, a child. but this is a digression. 
			the unwritten law of this region requires you to kill judge driscoll on 
			sight, and he and the community will expect that attention at your 
	 hands—though of course your own death by his bullet will answer 
			every purpose. look out for him! are you heeled—that is, 
			fixed?”
 “yes, he shall have his opportunity. if he attacks me i will 
			respond.”
 as wilson was leaving, he said—
 “the judge is still a little used up by his campaign work, 
			and will not get out for a day or so; but when he does get out, 
			you want to be on the alert.”
 about eleven at night the twins went out for exercise, and started on a
 long stroll in the veiled moonlight.
 tom driscoll had landed at hackett’s store, two miles below 
			dawson’s, just about half an hour earlier, the only passenger 
			for that lonely spot, and had walked up the shore 
			road and entered judge driscoll’s house without having 
			encountered any one either on the road or under the roof.
 he pulled down his window-blinds and lighted his candle. he laid 
			off his coat and hat and began his preparations. he unlocked his 
			trunk and got his suit of girl’s clothes out from under the 
			male attire in it, and laid it by. then he blacked his face with 
			burnt cork and put the cork in his pocket. his plan was, to slip 
			down to his uncle’s private sitting-room below, pass into 
			the bedroom, steal the safe-key from the old gentleman’s 
			clothes, and then go back and rob the safe. he took up his candle 
			to start. his courage and confidence were high, up to this point, 
			but both began to waver a little, now. suppose he should make a 
			noise, by some accident, and get caught—say, in the act of 
			opening the safe? perhaps it would be well to go armed. he took 
			the indian knife from its hiding-place, and felt a pleasant 
			return of his wandering courage. he slipped stealthily down the 
			narrow stair, his hair rising and his pulses halting at the 
			slightest creak. when he was half-way down, he was disturbed to 
			perceive that the landing below was touched by a faint glow of 
			light. what could that mean? was his uncle still up? no, that 
			was not likely; he must have left his night-taper there when he 
			went to bed. tom crept on down, 
			pausing at every step to listen. he found the door standing open,
 and glanced in. what he saw pleased him beyond measure. his uncle 
			was asleep on the sofa; on a small table at the head of the sofa 
			a lamp was burning low, and by it stood the old man’s small 
			tin cash-box, closed. near the box was a pile of bank-notes and a 
			piece of paper covered with figures in pencil. the safe-door was 
			not open. evidently the sleeper had wearied himself with work upon 
			his finances, and was taking a rest.
 tom set his candle on the stairs, and began to make his way toward 
			the pile of notes, stooping low as he went. when he was passing his 
			uncle, the old man stirred in his sleep, and tom stopped 
			instantly—stopped, and softly drew the knife from its sheath, 
			with his heart thumping, and his eyes fastened upon 
			his 
			benefactor’s face. after a moment or two he ventured forward 
			again—one step—reached for his prize and seized it, 
			dropping the knife-sheath. then he felt the old man’s 
			strong grip upon him, and a wild cry of “help! help!” 
			rang in his ear. without hesitation he drove the knife home—and 
			was free. some of the notes escaped from his left hand and fell in the 
			blood on the floor. he dropped the knife and snatched them up and started 
			to fly; transferred them to his left hand, and seized the knife again, 
			in his fright and confusion, but remembered himself and flung it from 
			him, as being a dangerous witness to carry away with him.
 he jumped for the stair-foot, and closed the door behind him; and as he
 snatched his candle and fled upward, the stillness of the night was broken
 by the sound of urgent footsteps approaching the house. in another moment
 he was in his room and the twins were standing aghast over the body of
 the murdered man!
 tom put on his coat, buttoned his hat under it, threw on his suit of
 girl’s clothes, 
			dropped the veil, blew out his light, locked the 
			room door by which he had just entered, taking the key, passed through 
			his other door into the back hall, locked that door and kept the key, 
			then worked his way along in the dark and descended the back stairs. 
			he was not expecting to meet anybody, for all interest was centered 
			in the other part of the house, now; his calculation proved correct. 
			by the time he was passing through the back-yard, mrs. pratt, her 
			servants, and a dozen half-dressed neighbors had joined the twins and 
			the dead, and accessions were still arriving at the front door.
 as tom, quaking as with a palsy, passed out at the gate, three women 
			came flying from the house on the opposite side of the lane. they 
			rushed by him and in at the gate, asking him what the trouble was 
			there, but not waiting for an answer. tom said to himself, 
			“those old maids waited to dress—they did the same thing 
			the night stevens’s house burned down next door.” in a few 
			minutes he was in the haunted house. he lighted a candle and took off 
			his girl-clothes. there 
			was blood on him all down his left side, and his right hand was red with 
			the stains of the blood-soaked notes which he had crushed in it; but 
			otherwise he was free from this sort of evidence. he cleansed his 
			hand on the straw, and cleaned most of the smut from his face. then he 
			burned his male and female attire to ashes, scattered the ashes, and put 
			on a disguise proper for a tramp. he blew out his light, went below, and 
			was soon loafing down the river road with the intent to borrow and use one 
			of roxy’s devices. he found a canoe and paddled off down-stream, 
			setting the canoe adrift as dawn approached, and making his way by land to 
			the next village, where he kept out of sight till a transient steamer came 
			along, and then took deck passage for st. louis. he was ill at ease until 
			dawson’s landing was behind him; then he said to himself, 
			“all the detectives on earth couldn’t trace me now; 
			there’s not a vestige of a clue left in the world; that homicide 
			will take its place with the permanent mysteries, and people 
			won’t get done trying to guess out the secret of it for 
			fifty years.”
 in st. louis, next morning, he read this brief telegram in the 
			papers—dated at dawson’s landing:
						 judge driscoll, an old and respected citizen, was assassinated
 			 here about midnight by a profligate italian nobleman or 
 			 barber on account of a quarrel growing out of the recent
 			 election. the assassin will probably be lynched.
 “one of the twins!” soliloquized tom; “how lucky! 
			it is the knife that has done him this grace. we never know when fortune 
			is trying to favor us. i actually cursed pudd’nhead wilson in my 
			heart for putting it out of my power to sell that knife. i take it 
			back, now.”
 tom was now rich and independent. he arranged with the planter, and mailed
 to wilson the new bill of sale which sold roxana to herself; then he
 telegraphed his aunt pratt:
						 have seen the awful news in the papers and am almost
 			 prostrated with grief. shall start by packet to-day. try to
 			 bear up till i come.
 when wilson reached the house of mourning and had gathered such details as
 mrs. pratt and the rest of the crowd could tell him, 
			he took command as mayor, and gave orders that nothing should be touched, 
			but everything left as it was until justice robinson should arrive and 
			take the proper measures as coroner. he cleared everybody out of the 
			room but the twins and himself. the sheriff soon arrived and took the 
			twins away to jail. wilson told them to keep heart, and promised to do 
			his best in their defense when the case should come to trial. justice 
			robinson came presently, and with him constable blake. they examined the 
			room thoroughly. they found the knife and the sheath. wilson noticed that 
			there were finger-prints on the knife-handle. that pleased him, for the 
			twins had required the earliest comers to make a scrutiny of their hands 
			and clothes, and neither these people nor wilson himself had found any
 blood-stains upon them. could there be a possibility that the twins had
 spoken the truth when they said they found the man dead when they ran
 into the house in answer to the cry for help? he thought of that
 mysterious girl at once. but this was not the sort of work for a girl to
 be engaged in. no 
			matter; tom driscoll’s room must be examined.
 after the coroner’s jury had viewed the body and its surroundings, 
			wilson suggested a search up-stairs, and he went along. the jury forced an
 entrance to tom’s room, but found nothing, of course.
 the coroner’s jury found that the homicide was committed by luigi, 
			and that angelo was accessory to it.
 the town was bitter against the unfortunates, and for the first few days
 after the murder they were in constant danger of being lynched. the grand
 jury presently indicted luigi for murder in the first degree, and angelo
 as accessory before the fact. the twins were transferred from the city
 jail to the county prison to await trial.
 wilson examined the finger-marks on the knife-handle and said to himself,
 “neither of the twins made those marks.” then 
			manifestly there was another person concerned, either in his own 
			interest or as hired assassin.
 but who could it be? that, he must try to find out. the safe was not
 open, the 
			cash-box was closed, and had three thousand dollars in it. then
 robbery was not the motive, and revenge was. where had the murdered man an
 enemy except luigi? there was but that one person in the world with a deep
 grudge against him.
 the mysterious girl! the girl was a great trial to wilson. if the motive
 had been robbery, the girl might answer; but there wasn’t any girl 
			that would want to take this old man’s life for revenge. he had no 
			quarrels with girls; he was a gentleman.
 wilson had perfect tracings of the finger-marks of the knife-handle; and
 among his glass-records he had a great array of finger-prints of women and
 girls, collected during the last fifteen or eighteen years, but he scanned
 them in vain, they successfully withstood every test; among them were no
 duplicates of the prints on the knife.
 the presence of the knife on the stage of the murder was a worrying
 circumstance for wilson. a week previously he had as good as admitted to
 himself that he believed luigi had possessed such a knife, and that he
 still 
			possessed it notwithstanding his pretense that it had been stolen. and 
			now here was the knife, and with it the twins. half the town had said
 the twins were humbugging when they claimed that they had lost their 
			knife, and now these people were joyful, and said, 
			“i told you so!”
 if their finger-prints had been on the handle—but it was useless 
			to bother any further about that; the finger-prints on the handle were 
			not theirs—that he knew perfectly.
 wilson refused to suspect tom; for first, tom couldn’t murder 
			anybody—he hadn’t character enough; secondly, if he could 
			murder a person he wouldn’t select his doting benefactor and 
			nearest relative; thirdly, self-interest was in 
			the way; for while the uncle lived, tom was sure of a free support and a 
			chance to get the destroyed will revived again, but with the uncle gone, 
			that chance was gone, too. it was true the will had really been revived, 
			as was now discovered, but tom could not have been aware of it, or he 
			would have spoken of it, in his native talky, unsecretive way. finally, 
			tom was in st. louis when 
			the murder was done, and got the news out of the morning journals, as was 
			shown by his telegram to his aunt. these speculations were unemphasized 
			sensations rather than articulated thoughts, for wilson would have 
			laughed at the idea of seriously connecting tom with the murder.
 wilson regarded the case of the twins as desperate—in fact, about
 hopeless. for he argued that if a confederate was not found, an
 enlightened missouri jury would hang them, sure; if a confederate was
 found, that would not improve the matter, but simply furnish one more
 person for the sheriff to hang. nothing could save the twins but the
 discovery of a person who did the murder on his sole personal 
			account—an undertaking which had all the aspect of the impossible. 
			still, the person who made the finger-prints must be sought. the twins 
			might have no case with him, but they certainly would have none 
			without him.
 so wilson mooned around, thinking, thinking, guessing, guessing, day and
 night, and arriving nowhere. whenever he ran across a girl or a woman he
 was not acquainted with, 
			he got her finger-prints, on one pretext or another; and they always cost 
			him a sigh when he got home, for they never tallied with the finger-marks 
			on the knife-handle.
 as to the mysterious girl, tom swore he knew no such girl, and did not
 remember ever seeing a girl wearing a dress like the one described by
 wilson. he admitted that he did not always lock his room, and that
 sometimes the servants forgot to lock the house doors; still, in his
 opinion the girl must have made but few visits or she would have been
 discovered. when wilson tried to connect her with the stealing-raid, and
 thought she might have been the old woman’s confederate, if not 
			the very thief herself disguised as an old woman, tom seemed stuck, and 
			also much interested, and said he would keep a sharp eye out for this 
			person or persons, although he was afraid that she or they would be too 
			smart to venture again into a town where everybody would now be on the 
			watch for a good while to come.
 everybody was pitying tom, he looked so quiet and sorrowful, and seemed to
 feel his great loss so deeply. he was playing a part, 
			but it was not all a part. the picture of his alleged uncle, as he had 
			last seen him, was before him in the dark pretty frequently, when he was 
			awake, and called again in his dreams, when he was asleep. he 
			wouldn’t go into the room where the tragedy had happened. this 
			charmed the doting mrs. pratt, who realized now, “as she had never 
			done before,” she said, what a sensitive and delicate nature her 
			darling had, and how he adored his poor uncle.
the murderer chuckles.
		 even the clearest and most perfect circumstantial evidence
 is likely to be at fault, after all, and therefore ought to
 be received with great caution. take the case of any pencil,
 sharpened by any woman: if you have witnesses, you will find
 she did it with a knife; but if you take simply the aspect
 of the pencil, you will say she did it with her 
			 teeth.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
the weeks dragged along, no friend visiting the 
			jailed twins but their counsel and aunt patsy cooper, and the day of trial 
			came at last—the heaviest day in wilson’s life; for with all 
			his tireless diligence he had discovered no sign or trace of the missing 
			confederate. “confederate” was the term he had long ago 
			privately accepted for that person—not as being unquestionably the 
			right term, but as being at least possibly the right one, though he was 
			never able to understand why the twins did not vanish and escape, as 
			the confederate had done, instead of remaining by the murdered man and 
			getting caught there.
 the court-house was crowded, of course, and would remain so to the finish,
 for not only in the town itself, but in the country for miles around, the
 trial was the one topic of conversation among the people. mrs. pratt, in
 deep mourning, and tom with a weed on his hat, had seats near pembroke
 howard, the public prosecutor, and back of them sat a great array of
 friends of the family. the twins had but one friend present to keep their
 counsel in countenance, their poor old sorrowing landlady. she sat near
 wilson, and looked her friendliest. in the “nigger corner” 
			sat chambers; also roxy, with good clothes on, and her bill of sale in 
			her pocket. it was her most precious possession, and she never parted 
			with it, day or night. tom had allowed her thirty-five dollars a month 
			ever since he came into his property, and had said that he and she ought 
			to be grateful to the twins for making them rich; but had roused such a 
			temper in her by 
			this speech that he did not repeat the argument 
			afterward. she said the old judge had treated her child a thousand times 
			better than he deserved, and had never done her an unkindness in his life; 
			so she hated these outlandish devils for killing him, and shouldn’t 
			ever sleep satisfied till she saw them hanged for it. she was here to 
			watch the trial, now, and was going to lift up just one 
			“hooraw” over it if the county judge put her in jail 
			a year for it. she gave her turbaned head a toss and said, “when 
			dat verdic’ comes, i’s gwine to lif’ dat roof,
			now, i tell you.”
 pembroke howard briefly sketched the state’s case. he said he 
			would show by a chain of circumstantial evidence without break or fault 
			in it anywhere, that the principal prisoner at the bar committed the 
			murder; that the motive was partly revenge, and partly a desire to take 
			his own life out of jeopardy, and that his brother, by his presence, was a
 consenting accessory to the crime; a crime which was the basest known to
 the calendar of human misdeeds—assassination; that it was conceived
 by the blackest of hearts and 
			consummated by the cowardliest of hands; a
 crime which had broken a loving sister’s heart, blighted the 
			happiness of a young nephew who was as dear as a son, brought 
			inconsolable grief to many friends, and sorrow and loss to the whole 
			community. the utmost penalty of the outraged law would be exacted, and 
			upon the accused, now present at the bar, that penalty would 
			unquestionably be executed. he would reserve further remark until his 
			closing speech.
 he was strongly moved, and so also was the whole house; mrs. pratt and
 several other women were weeping when he sat down, and many an eye that
 was full of hate was riveted upon the unhappy prisoners.
 witness after witness was called by the state, and questioned at length;
 but the cross-questioning was brief. wilson knew they could furnish
 nothing valuable for his side. people were sorry for pudd’nhead;
 his budding career would get hurt by this trial.
 several witnesses swore they heard judge driscoll say in his public speech
 that the twins would be able to find their lost knife 
			again when they needed it to assassinate somebody with. this was not 
			news, but now it was seen to have been sorrowfully prophetic, and a 
			profound sensation quivered through the hushed court-room when those 
			dismal words were repeated.
 the public prosecutor rose and said that it was within his knowledge,
 through a conversation held with judge driscoll on the last day of his
 life, that counsel for the defense had brought him a challenge from the
 person charged at this bar with murder; that he had refused to fight with 
			a confessed assassin—“that is, on the field of 
			honor,” but had added significantly, that he would be ready 
			for him elsewhere. presumably the person here charged with murder was 
			warned that he must kill or be killed the first time he should meet 
			judge driscoll. if counsel for the defense chose to let the statement 
			stand so, he would not call him to the witness stand. mr. wilson said he 
			would offer no denial. [murmurs in the house—“it is getting 
			worse and worse for wilson’s case.”]
 mrs. pratt testified that she heard no outcry, 
			and did not know what woke her up, unless it was the sound of rapid 
			footsteps approaching the front door. she jumped up and ran out in the 
			hall just as she was, and heard the footsteps flying up the front steps 
			and then following behind her as she ran to the sitting-room. there she 
			found the accused standing over her murdered brother. [here she broke 
			down and sobbed. sensation in the court.] resuming, she said the persons 
			entering behind her were mr. rogers and mr. buckstone.
 cross-examined by wilson, she said the twins proclaimed their innocence;
 declared that they had been taking a walk, and had hurried to the house in
 response to a cry for help which was so loud and strong that they had
 heard it at a considerable distance; that they begged her and the
 gentlemen just mentioned to examine their hands and clothes—which
 was done, and no blood stains found.
 confirmatory evidence followed from rogers and buckstone.
 the finding of the knife was verified, the advertisement minutely
 describing it and offering 
			a reward for it was put in evidence, and its exact correspondence with 
			that description proved. then followed a few minor details, and the case 
			for the state was closed.
 wilson said that he had three witnesses, the misses clarkson, who would
 testify that they met a veiled young woman leaving judge driscoll’s
 premises by the back gate a few minutes after the cries for help were
 heard, and that their evidence, taken with certain circumstantial evidence
 which he would call the court’s attention to, would in his opinion
 convince the court that there was still one person concerned in this crime
 who had not yet been found, and also that a stay of proceedings ought to
 be granted, in justice to his clients, until that person should be
 discovered. as it was late, he would ask leave to defer the examination of
 his three witnesses until the next morning.
 the crowd poured out of the place and went flocking away in excited groups
 and couples, talking the events of the session over with vivacity and
 consuming interest, and everybody seemed to have had a satisfactory and
 enjoyable 
			day except the accused, their counsel, and their old-lady
 friend. there was no cheer among these, and no substantial hope.
 in parting with the twins aunt patsy did attempt a good-night with a gay
 pretense of hope and cheer in it, but broke down without finishing.
 absolutely secure as tom considered himself to be, the opening 
			solemnities of the trial had nevertheless oppressed him with a 
			vague uneasiness, his being a nature sensitive to even the 
			smallest alarms; but from the moment that the poverty and 
			weakness of wilson’s case lay exposed to the court, he 
			was comfortable once more, even jubilant. he left the court-room
 sarcastically sorry for wilson. “the clarksons met an 
			unknown woman in the back lane,” he said to 
			himself—“that is his case! i’ll give 
			him a century to find her in—a couple of them if he 
			likes. a woman who doesn’t exist any longer, and the clothes 
			that gave her her sex burnt up and the ashes thrown away—oh, 
			certainly, he’ll find her easy enough!” this 
			reflection set him to admiring, for the hundredth time, the 
			shrewd ingenuities by which he had insured himself against 
			detection—more, against even suspicion.
 “nearly always in cases like this there is some little detail 
			or other overlooked, some wee little track or trace left behind, and 
			detection follows; but here there’s not even the faintest suggestion 
			of a trace left. no more than a bird leaves when it flies through the 
			air—yes, through the night, you may say. the man that can track a 
			bird through the air in the dark and find that bird is the man to track 
			me out and find the judge’s assassin—no other need apply. 
			and that is the job that has been laid out for poor pudd’nhead 
			wilson, of all people in the world! lord, it will be pathetically funny 
			to see him grubbing and groping after that woman that don’t exist, 
			and the right person sitting under his very nose all the time!” 
			the more he thought the situation over, the more the humor of it struck 
			him. finally he said, “i’ll never let him hear the last of 
			that woman. every time i catch him in company, to his dying day, 
			i’ll ask him in the guileless affectionate way that 
			used to gravel him so when i inquired how his unborn law-business 
			was coming along, ‘got on her track yet—hey, 
			pudd’nhead?’” he wanted to laugh, but that 
			would not have answered; there were people about, and he was mourning 
			for his uncle. he made up his mind that it would be good entertainment 
			to look in on wilson that night and watch him worry over his barren 
			law-case and goad him with an exasperating word or two of sympathy and 
			commiseration now and then.
 wilson wanted no supper, he had no appetite. he got out all the
 finger-prints of girls and women in his collection of records and pored
 gloomily over them an hour or more, trying to convince himself that that
 troublesome girl’s marks were there somewhere and had been 
			overlooked. but it was not so. he drew back his chair, clasped his hands 
			over his head, and gave himself up to dull and arid musings.
 tom driscoll dropped in, an hour after dark, and said with a pleasant
 laugh as he took a seat—
 “hello, we’ve gone back to the amusements 
			of our days of neglect and obscurity for consolation, have we?” 
			and he took up one of the glass strips and held it against the light 
			to inspect it. “come, cheer up, old man; there’s no use 
			in losing your grip and going back to this child’s-play merely 
			because this big sunspot is drifting across your shiny new
 disk. it’ll pass, and you’ll be all right 
			again,”—and he laid the glass down. 
			“did you think you could win always?”
 “oh, no,” said wilson, with a sigh, “i 
			didn’t expect that, but i can’t believe luigi killed your 
			uncle, and i feel very sorry for him. it makes me blue. and you would 
			feel as i do, tom, if you were not prejudiced against those young 
			fellows.”
 “i don’t know about that,” and tom’s 
			countenance darkened, for his memory reverted to his kicking; 
			“i owe them no good will, considering the brunette
 one’s treatment of me that night. prejudice or no prejudice, 
			pudd’nhead, i don’t like them, and when they get their 
			deserts you’re not going to find me sitting on the 
			mourner’s bench.”
 he took up another strip of glass, and exclaimed—
 “why, here’s old roxy’s label! are you going to 
			ornament the royal palaces with nigger paw-marks, too? by the date here, 
			i was seven months old when this was done, and she was nursing me and her 
			little nigger cub. there’s a line straight across her thumb-print. 
			how comes that?” and tom held out the piece of glass to wilson.
 “that is common,” said the bored man, wearily. 
			“scar of a cut or a scratch, usually”—and he took 
			the strip of glass indifferently, and raised it toward the lamp.
 all the blood sunk suddenly out of his face; his hand quaked, and he gazed
 at the polished surface before him with the glassy stare of a corpse.
 “great heavens, what’s the matter with you, wilson? 
			are you going to faint?”
 tom sprang for a glass of water and offered it, but wilson shrank
 shuddering from him and said—
 “no, no!—take it away!” his breast was rising and 
			falling, and he moved his head 
			about in a dull and wandering way, like a person who had been stunned. 
			presently he said, “i shall feel better when i get to bed; i have 
			been overwrought to-day; yes, and over worked for many days.”
 “then i’ll leave you and let you to get to your rest. 
			good-night, old man.” but as tom went out he couldn’t deny 
			himself a small parting gibe: “don’t take it so hard; a body 
			can’t win every time; you’ll hang somebody yet.”
 wilson muttered to himself, “it is no lie to say i am sorry 
			i have to begin with you, miserable dog though you are!”
 he braced himself up with a glass of cold whisky, and went to work again.
 he did not compare the new finger-marks unintentionally left by tom a few
 minutes before on roxy’s glass with the tracings of the marks left 
			on the knife-handle, there being no need for that (for his trained eye), 
			but busied himself with another matter, muttering from time to time, 
			“idiot that i was!—nothing but a girl would do 
			me—a man in girl’s clothes never occurred to me.” 
			first, he hunted out the 
			plate containing the finger-prints made by tom when he was twelve years 
			old, and laid it by itself; then he brought forth the marks made by 
			tom’s baby fingers when he was a suckling of seven months, and 
			placed these two plates with the one containing this subject’s 
			newly (and unconsciously) made record.
 “now the series is complete,” he said with satisfaction, 
			and sat down to inspect these things and enjoy them.
 but his enjoyment was brief. he stared a considerable time at the three
 strips, and seemed stupefied with astonishment. at last he put them down
 and said, “i can’t make it out at all—hang it, 
			the baby’s don’t tally with the others!”
 he walked the floor for half an hour puzzling over his enigma, then he
 hunted out two other glass plates.
 he sat down and puzzled over these things a good while, but kept
 muttering, “it’s no use; i can’t understand it. 
			they don’t tally right, and yet i’ll swear the names 
			and dates are right, and so of course they ought to tally.
			i	never labeled one of these thing carelessly in my life.
 there is a most extraordinary mystery here.”
 he was tired out, now, and his brains were beginning to clog. he said he
 would sleep himself fresh, and then see what he could do with this riddle.
 he slept through a troubled and unrestful hour, then unconsciousness began
 to shred away, and presently he rose drowsily to a sitting posture. 
			“now what was that dream?” he said, trying to recall it; 
			“what was that dream?—it seemed to unravel that 
			puz—”
 he landed in the middle of the floor at a bound, without finishing the
 sentence, and ran and turned up his light and seized his 
			“records.” he took a single swift glance at them and 
			cried out—
 “it’s so! heavens, what a revelation! and for twenty-three 
			years no man has ever suspected it!”
doom.
 he is useless on top of the ground; he ought 
		 to be under it, inspiring the cabbages.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
april . this is the day upon which we are reminded of what
 we are on the other three hundred and 
		 sixty-four.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
wilson put on enough clothes for business 
			purposes and went to work under a high pressure of steam. he was awake 
			all over. all sense of weariness had been swept away by the invigorating 
			refreshment of the great and hopeful discovery which he had made. he 
			made fine and accurate reproductions of a number of his 
			“records,” and then enlarged them on a scale of ten to one 
			with his pantograph. he did these pantograph enlargements on sheets of 
			white cardboard, and made each individual line of the bewildering maze 
			of whorls or curves or loops which constituted the “pattern,” 
			of a “record” stand out bold and black by reinforcing 
			it with ink. to the untrained eye the collection of delicate originals 
			made by the human finger on the glass plates looked about alike; but when
 enlarged ten times they resembled the markings of a block of wood that has
 been sawed across the grain, and the dullest eye could detect at a glance,
 and at a distance of many feet, that no two of the patterns were alike.
 when wilson had at last finished his tedious and difficult work, he 
			arranged its results according to a plan in which a progressive order and 
			sequence was a principal feature; then he added to the batch several 
			pantograph enlargements which he had made from time to time in bygone 
			years.
 the night was spent and the day well advanced, now. by the time he had
 snatched a trifle of breakfast it was nine o’clock, and the court 
			was ready to begin its sitting. he was in his place twelve minutes later 
			with his “records.”
 tom driscoll caught a slight glimpse of the records, and nudged his
 nearest friend and said, with a wink, “pudd’nhead’s 
			got a rare eye to business—thinks that as long as he 
			can’t win his case it’s at least a noble good chance to 
			advertise his palace-window decorations without any expense.” 
			wilson was informed that his witnesses had been delayed, but would 
			arrive presently; but he rose and said he should probably not have 
			occasion to make use of their testimony. [an amused murmur ran through 
			the room—“it’s a clean backdown! he gives up without 
			hitting a lick!”] wilson continued—“i have other 
			testimony—and better. [this compelled interest, and evoked murmurs 
			of surprise that had a detectable ingredient of disappointment in them.] 
			if i seem to be springing this evidence upon the court, i offer as my 
			justification for this, that i did not discover its existence until late 
			last night, and have been engaged in examining and classifying it ever 
			since, until half an hour ago. i shall offer it presently; but first i 
			wish to say a few preliminary words.
 “may it please the court, the claim given the front place, the claim 
 most persistently urged, the claim most strenuously and i may even say
 aggressively and defiantly insisted upon by the prosecution, is 
			this—that the person 
			whose hand left the blood-stained finger-prints upon the handle of the 
			indian knife is the person who committed the murder.” wilson paused, 
			during several moments, to give impressiveness to what he was about to 
			say, and then added tranquilly, “we grant that 
			claim.”
 it was an electrical surprise. no one was prepared for such an admission.
 a buzz of astonishment rose on all sides, and people were heard to
 intimate that the overworked lawyer had lost his mind. even the veteran
 judge, accustomed as he was to legal ambushes and masked batteries in
 criminal procedure, was not sure that his ears were not deceiving him, and
 asked counsel what it was he had said. howard’s impassive face 
			betrayed no sign, but his attitude and bearing lost something of their 
			careless confidence for a moment. wilson resumed:
 “we not only grant that claim, but we welcome it and strongly 
			endorse it. leaving that matter for the present, we will now proceed to 
			consider other points in the case which we propose to establish by 
			evidence, 
			and shall include that one in the chain in its proper place.”
 he had made up his mind to try a few hardy guesses, in mapping out his
 theory of the origin and motive of the murder—guesses designed to
 fill up gaps in it—guesses which could help if they hit, and would
 probably do no harm if they didn’t.
 “to my mind, certain circumstances of the case before the court 
			seem to suggest a motive for the homicide quite different from the one 
			insisted on by the state. it is my conviction that the motive was not 
			revenge, but robbery. it has been urged that the presence of the accused 
			brothers in that fatal room, just after notification that one of them 
			must take the life of judge driscoll or lose his own the moment the 
			parties should meet, clearly signifies that the natural instinct of 
			self-preservation moved my clients to go there secretly and save count 
			luigi by destroying his adversary.
 “then why did they stay there, after the deed was done? mrs. 
			pratt had time, although she did not hear the cry for help, but woke up 
			some moments later, to run to that 
			room—and there she found these 
			men standing and making no effort to escape. if they were guilty, they 
			ought to have been running out of the house at the same time that she 
			was running to that room. if they had had such a strong instinct toward 
			self-preservation as to move them to kill that unarmed man, what had 
			become of it now, when it should have been more alert than ever? would 
			any of us have remained there? let us not slander our intelligence to 
			that degree.
 “much stress has been laid upon the fact that the accused 
			offered a very large reward for the knife with which this murder was 
			done; that no thief came forward to claim that extraordinary reward; 
			that the latter fact was good circumstantial evidence that the claim 
			that the knife had been stolen was a vanity and a fraud; that these 
			details taken in connection with the memorable and apparently prophetic 
			speech of the deceased concerning that knife, and the final discovery 
			of that very knife in the fatal room where no living person was found 
			present with the slaughtered man but the owner of the knife and his 
			brother, 
			form an indestructible chain of evidence which fixes the crime 
			upon those unfortunate strangers.
 “but i shall presently ask to be sworn, and shall testify that 
			there was a large reward offered for the thief, also; and it 
			was offered secretly and not advertised; that this fact was indiscreetly 
			mentioned—or at least tacitly admitted—in what was supposed 
			to be safe circumstances, but may not have been. the thief may 
			have been present himself. [tom driscoll had been looking at the speaker, 
			but dropped his eyes at this point.] in that case he would retain the 
			knife in his possession, not daring to offer it for sale, or for pledge 
			in a pawn-shop. [there was a nodding of heads among the audience by way 
			of admission that this was not a bad stroke.] i shall prove to the 
			satisfaction of the jury that there was a person in judge 
			driscoll’s room several minutes before the accused entered it. 
			[this produced a strong sensation; the last drowsy-head in the court-room 
			roused up, now, and made preparation to listen.] if it shall seem 
			necessary, i will prove by the misses clarkson 
			that they met a veiled person—ostensibly a woman—coming out 
			of the back gate a few minutes after the cry for help was heard. this 
			person was not a woman, but a man dressed in woman’s clothes.” 
			another sensation. wilson had his eye on tom when he hazarded this 
			guess, to see what effect it would produce. he was satisfied with the 
			result, and said to himself, “it was a 
			success—he’s hit!”
 “the object of that person in that house was robbery, not murder. 
			it is true that the safe was not open, but there was an ordinary tin
			cash-box on the table, with three thousand dollars in it. it is easily 
			supposable that the thief was concealed in the house; that he knew of 
			this box, and of its owner’s habit of counting its contents and 
			arranging his accounts at night—if he had that habit, which i do 
			not assert, of course;—that he tried to take the box while its owner 
			slept, but made a noise and was seized, and had to use the knife to save 
			himself from capture; and that he fled without his booty because he 
			heard help coming.
 “i have now done with my theory, and will proceed to the 
			evidences by which i propose to try to prove its soundness.” 
			wilson took up several of his strips of glass. when the audience 
			recognized these familiar mementoes of pudd’nhead’s 
			old-time childish “puttering” and folly, the tense and
 funereal interest vanished out of their faces, and the house burst into
 volleys of relieving and refreshing laughter, and tom chirked up and
 joined in the fun himself; but wilson was apparently not disturbed. he
 arranged his records on the table before him, and said—
 “i beg the indulgence of the court while i make a few remarks in
 explanation of some evidence which i am about to introduce, and which i
 shall presently ask to be allowed to verify under oath on the 
			witness stand. every human being carries with him from his cradle to his 
			grave certain physical marks which do not change their character, and by 
			which he can always be identified—and that without shade of doubt or
 question. these marks are his signature, his physiological autograph, so
 to speak, and this autograph 
			can not be counterfeited, nor can he disguise
 it or hide it away, nor can it become illegible by the wear and mutations
 of time. this signature is not his face—age can change that beyond
 recognition; it is not his hair, for that can fall out; it is not his
 height, for duplicates of that exist; it is not his form, for duplicates
 of that exist also, whereas this signature is each man’s very 
			own—there is no duplicate of it among the swarming populations 
			of the globe! [the audience were interested once more.]
 “this autograph consists of the delicate lines or corrugations with 
			which nature marks the insides of the hands and the soles of the feet. if 
			you will look at the balls of your fingers,—you that have very sharp
 eyesight,—you will observe that these dainty curving lines lie close
 together, like those that indicate the borders of oceans in maps, and that
 they form various clearly defined patterns, such as arches, circles, long
 curves, whorls, etc., and that these patterns differ on the different
 fingers. [every man in the room had his hand up 
			to the light, now, and his head canted to one side, and 
			was minutely 
			scrutinizing the balls of his fingers; there were whispered ejaculations 
			of ‘why, it’s so—i never noticed that before!’] 
			the patterns on the right hand are not the same as those on the left. 
			[ejaculations of ‘why, that’s so, too!’] taken finger 
			for finger, your patterns differ from your neighbor’s. [comparisons 
			were made all over the house—even the judge and jury were absorbed 
			in this curious work.] the patterns of a twin’s right hand are not 
			the same as those on his left. one twin’s patterns are never the 
			same as his fellow-twin’s patterns—the jury will find that 
			the patterns upon the finger-balls of the accused follow this rule. 
			[an examination of the twins’ hands was begun at once.] you have 
			often heard of twins who were so exactly alike that when dressed alike 
			their own parents could not tell them apart. yet there was never a twin 
			born into this world that did not carry from birth to death a sure 
			identifier in this mysterious and marvelous natal autograph. that once 
			known to you, his fellow-twin could never personate him and deceive 
			you.”
 wilson stopped and stood silent. inattention dies a quick and sure death
 when a speaker does that. the stillness gives warning that something is
 coming. all palms and finger-balls went down, now, all slouching forms
 straightened, all heads came up, all eyes were fastened upon 
			wilson’s face. he waited yet one, two, three moments, to let his 
			pause complete and perfect its spell upon the house; then, when through 
			the profound hush he could hear the ticking of the clock on the wall, he 
			put out his hand and took the indian knife by the blade and held it aloft 
			where all could see the sinister spots upon its ivory handle; then he 
			said, in a level and passionless voice—
 “upon this haft stands the assassin’s natal autograph, written 
			in the blood of that helpless and unoffending old man who loved you and 
			whom you all loved. there is but one man in the whole earth whose hand can
 duplicate that crimson sign,”—he paused and raised his eyes 
			to the pendulum swinging back and forth,—“and please god 
			we will produce 
			that man in this room before the clock strikes noon!”
 stunned, distraught, unconscious of its own movement, the house half rose,
 as if expecting to see the murderer appear at the door, and a breeze of
 muttered ejaculations swept the place. “order in the 
			court!—sit down!” this from the sheriff. he was obeyed, and 
			quiet reigned again. wilson stole a glance at tom, and said to himself, 
			“he is flying signals of distress, now; even people who despise him 
			are pitying him; they think this is a hard ordeal for a young fellow who 
			has lost his benefactor by so cruel a stroke—and they are 
			right.” he resumed his speech:
 “for more than twenty years i have amused my compulsory leisure with
 collecting these curious physical signatures in this town. at my house i
 have hundreds upon hundreds of them. each and every one is labelled with
 name and date; not labelled the next day or even the next hour, but in the
 very minute that the impression was taken. when i go upon the witness 
			stand i will repeat under oath the things which i am now saying. i 
			have the finger-prints of the court, the sheriff, and every member of the 
			jury. there is hardly a person in this room, white or black, whose natal
 signature i cannot produce, and not one of them can so disguise himself
 that i cannot pick him out from a multitude of his fellow-creatures and
 unerringly identify him by his hands. and if he and i should live to be a
 hundred i could still do it. [the interest of the audience was steadily
 deepening, now.]
 “i have studied some of these signatures so much that i know them 
			as well as the bank cashier knows the autograph of his oldest customer. 
			while i turn my back now, i beg that several persons will be so good as 
			to pass their fingers through their hair, and then press them upon one 
			of the panes of the window near the jury, and that among them the accused 
			may set their finger-marks. also, i beg that these experimenters, 
			or others, will set their finger-marks upon another pane, and add again 
			the marks of the accused, but not placing them in the same order or 
			relation to the other signatures as before—for, by one 
			chance in a million, a person might happen upon the right marks by pure 
			guess-work once, therefore i wish to be tested twice.”
 he turned his back, and the two panes were quickly covered with 
			delicately-lined oval spots, but visible only to such persons as could 
			get a dark background for them—the foliage of a tree, outside, for 
			instance. then, upon call, wilson went to the window, made his 
			examination, and said—
 “this is count luigi’s right hand; this one, three signatures 
			below, is his left. here is count angelo’s right; down here is his 
			left. now for the other pane: here and here are count luigi’s, 
			here and here are his brother’s.” he faced about. 
			“am i right?”
 a deafening explosion of applause was the answer. the bench said—
 “this certainly approaches the miraculous!”
 wilson turned to the window again and remarked, pointing with his 
			finger—
 “this is the signature of mr. justice robinson. [applause.] this, of
 constable blake. [applause.] this, of john mason, juryman. [applause.]
 this, of the sheriff. [applause.] 
			i cannot name the others, but i have them all at home, named and dated, 
			and could identify them all by my finger-print records.”
 he moved to his place through a storm of applause—which the sheriff
 stopped, and also made the people sit down, for they were all standing and
 struggling to see, of course. court, jury, sheriff, and everybody had been
 too absorbed in observing wilson’s performance to attend to the 
			audience earlier.
 “now, then,” said wilson, “i have here the natal 
			autographs of two children—thrown up to ten times the natural size 
			by the pantograph, so that any one who can see at all can tell the 
			markings apart at a glance. we will call the children a and 
			b. here are a’s finger-marks, taken at the age of 
			five months. here they are again, taken at seven months. [tom started.] 
			they are alike, you see. here are b’s at five months, and 
			also at seven months. they, too, exactly copy each other, but the patterns 
			are quite different from a’s, you observe. i shall refer to 
			these again presently, but we will turn them face down, now.
 “here, thrown up ten sizes, are the natal autographs of the two 
			persons who are here before you accused of murdering judge driscoll. i 
			made these pantograph copies last night, and will so swear when i go upon 
			the witness stand. i ask the jury to compare them with the finger-marks 
			of the accused upon the window panes, and tell the court if they are 
			the same.”
 he passed a powerful magnifying-glass to the foreman.
 one juryman after another took the cardboard and the glass and made the
 comparison. then the foreman said to the judge—
 “your honor, we are all agreed that they are identical.”
 wilson said to the foreman—
 “please turn that cardboard face down, and take this one, and 
 compare it searchingly, by the magnifier, with the fatal signature 
			upon the knife-handle, and report your finding to the court.”
 again the jury made minute examinations, and again reported—
 “we find them to be exactly identical, your honor.”
 wilson turned toward the counsel for the prosecution, and there was a
 clearly recognizable note of warning in his voice when he said—
 “may it please the court, the state has claimed, strenuously 
			and persistently, that the blood-stained finger-prints upon that 
			knife-handle were left there by the assassin of judge driscoll. you 
			have heard us grant that claim, and welcome it.” he turned to 
			the jury: “compare the finger-prints of the accused with the 
			finger-prints left by the assassin—and report.”
 the comparison began. as it proceeded, all movement and all sound ceased,
 and the deep silence of an absorbed and waiting suspense settled upon the
 house; and when at last the words came—
		 “they do not even resemble,” a thunder-crash of 
			applause followed and the house sprang to its feet, but was quickly 
			repressed by official force and brought to order again. tom was altering 
			his position every few minutes, 
			now, but none of his changes brought repose nor any small trifle of 
			comfort. when the house’s attention was become fixed once more, 
			wilson said gravely, indicating the twins with a gesture—
 “these men are innocent—i have no further concern with 
			them. [another outbreak of applause began, but was promptly checked.] 
			we will now proceed to find the guilty. [tom’s eyes were starting 
			from their sockets—yes, it was a cruel day for the bereaved youth, 
			everybody thought.] we will return to the infant autographs of a 
			and b. i will ask the jury to take these large pantograph 
			facsimilies of a’s marked five months and seven months. 
			do they tally?”
 the foreman responded—
		 “perfectly.”
 “now examine this pantograph, taken at eight months, and also 
			marked a. does it tally with the other two?”
 the surprised response was—
 “no—they differ widely!”
 “you are quite right. now take these two pantographs of 
			b’s autograph, marked 
			five months and seven months. do they tally with each other?”
 “yes—perfectly.”
 “take this third pantograph marked b, eight months. does it 
			tally with b’s other two?”
 “by no means!”
 “do you know how to account for those strange discrepancies? i 
			will tell you. for a purpose unknown to us, but probably a selfish one, 
			somebody changed those children in the cradle.”
 this produced a vast sensation, naturally; roxana was astonished at this
 admirable guess, but not disturbed by it. to guess the exchange was one
 thing, to guess who did it quite another. pudd’nhead wilson could do
 wonderful things, no doubt, but he couldn’t do impossible ones. 
			safe? she was perfectly safe. she smiled privately.
 “between the ages of seven months and eight months those children 
			were changed in the cradle”—he made one of his 
			effect-collecting pauses, and added—“and the 
			person who did it is in this house!”
 roxy’s pulses stood still! the house was thrilled as with an 
			electric shock, and the people half rose as if to seek a glimpse of the 
			person who had made that exchange. tom was growing limp; the life seemed 
			oozing out of him. wilson resumed:
 “a was put into b’s cradle in the nursery; 
			b was transferred to the kitchen and became a negro and a slave, 
			[sensation—confusion of angry ejaculations]—but within a 
			quarter of an hour he will stand before you white and free! [burst of 
			applause, checked by the officers.] from seven months onward until now, 
			a has still been a usurper, and in my finger-record he bears 
			b’s name. here is his pantograph at the age of twelve. 
			compare it with the assassin’s signature upon the knife-handle. 
			do they tally?”
 the foreman answered—
 “to the minutest detail!”
 wilson said, solemnly—
 “the murderer of your friend and mine—york driscoll of the 
			generous hand and the kindly spirit—sits in among you. 
			valet de chambre, negro and slave,—falsely called 
			thomas à becket driscoll,—make upon the window the 
			finger-prints that will hang you!”
 tom turned his ashen face imploring toward the speaker, made some impotent
 movements with his white lips, then slid limp and lifeless to the floor.
 wilson broke the awed silence with the words—
 “there is no need. he has confessed.”
 roxy flung herself upon her knees, covered her face with her hands, and
 out through her sobs the words struggled—
 “de lord have mercy on me, po’ misable sinner dat i is!”
 the clock struck twelve.
 the court rose; the new prisoner, handcuffed, was removed.
conclusion
		 it is often the case that the man who can’t tell a lie
 thinks he is the best judge of one.—pudd’nhead 
			 wilson’s calendar.
october , the discovery. it was wonderful to find
 america, but it would have been more wonderful to miss 
		 it.—pudd’nhead wilson’s calendar.
the town sat up all night to discuss the 
