 ferdinand. whores by that rule are precious.
 duchess. will you hear me?
 i 'll never marry.
 cardinal. so most widows say;
 but commonly that motion lasts no longer
 than the turning of an hour-glass: the funeral sermon
 and it end both together.
 ferdinand. now hear me:
 you live in a rank pasture, here, i' the court;
 there is a kind of honey-dew that 's deadly;
 't will poison your fame; look to 't. be not cunning;
 for they whose faces do belie their hearts
 are witches ere they arrive at twenty years,
 ay, and give the devil suck.
 duchess. this is terrible good counsel.
 ferdinand. hypocrisy is woven of a fine small thread,
 subtler than vulcan's engine:[] yet, believe 't,
 your darkest actions, nay, your privat'st thoughts,
 will come to light.
 cardinal. you may flatter yourself,
 and take your own choice; privately be married
 under the eaves of night——
 ferdinand. think 't the best voyage
 that e'er you made; like the irregular crab,
 which, though 't goes backward, thinks that it goes right
 because it goes its own way: but observe,
 such weddings may more properly be said
 to be executed than celebrated.
 cardinal. the marriage night
 is the entrance into some prison.
 ferdinand. and those joys,
 those lustful pleasures, are like heavy sleeps
 which do fore-run man's mischief.
 cardinal. fare you well.
 wisdom begins at the end: remember it.
 [exit.]
 duchess. i think this speech between you both was studied,
 it came so roundly off.
 ferdinand. you are my sister;
 this was my father's poniard, do you see?
 i 'd be loth to see 't look rusty, 'cause 'twas his.
 i would have you give o'er these chargeable revels:
 a visor and a mask are whispering-rooms
 that were never built for goodness,—fare ye well—
 and women like variety of courtship.
 what cannot a neat knave with a smooth tale
 make a woman believe? farewell, lusty widow.
 [exit.]
 duchess. shall this move me? if all my royal kindred
 lay in my way unto this marriage,
 i 'd make them my low footsteps. and even now,
 even in this hate, as men in some great battles,
 by apprehending danger, have achiev'd
 almost impossible actions (i have heard soldiers say so),
 so i through frights and threatenings will assay
 this dangerous venture. let old wives report
 i wink'd and chose a husband.—cariola,
 to thy known secrecy i have given up
 more than my life,—my fame.
 cariola. both shall be safe;
 for i 'll conceal this secret from the world
 as warily as those that trade in poison
 keep poison from their children.
 duchess. thy protestation
 is ingenious and hearty; i believe it.
 is antonio come?
 cariola. he attends you.
 duchess. good dear soul,
 leave me; but place thyself behind the arras,
 where thou mayst overhear us. wish me good speed;
 for i am going into a wilderness,
 where i shall find nor path nor friendly clue
 to be my guide.
 [cariola goes behind the arras.]
 [enter antonio]
 i sent for you: sit down;
 take pen and ink, and write: are you ready?
 antonio. yes.
 duchess. what did i say?
 antonio. that i should write somewhat.
 duchess. o, i remember.
 after these triumphs and this large expense
 it 's fit, like thrifty husbands,[] we inquire
 what 's laid up for to-morrow.
 antonio. so please your beauteous excellence.
 duchess. beauteous!
 indeed, i thank you. i look young for your sake;
 you have ta'en my cares upon you.
 antonio. i 'll fetch your grace
 the particulars of your revenue and expense.
 duchess. o, you are
 an upright treasurer: but you mistook;
 for when i said i meant to make inquiry
 what 's laid up for to-morrow, i did mean
 what 's laid up yonder for me.
 antonio. where?
 duchess. in heaven.
 i am making my will (as 'tis fit princes should,
 in perfect memory), and, i pray, sir, tell me,
 were not one better make it smiling, thus,
 than in deep groans and terrible ghastly looks,
 as if the gifts we parted with procur'd[]
 that violent distraction?
 antonio. o, much better.
 duchess. if i had a husband now, this care were quit:
 but i intend to make you overseer.
 what good deed shall we first remember? say.
 antonio. begin with that first good deed began i' the world
 after man's creation, the sacrament of marriage;
 i 'd have you first provide for a good husband;
 give him all.
 duchess. all!
 antonio. yes, your excellent self.
 duchess. in a winding-sheet?
 antonio. in a couple.
 duchess. saint winifred, that were a strange will!
 antonio. 'twere stranger[] if there were no will in you
 to marry again.
 duchess. what do you think of marriage?
 antonio. i take 't, as those that deny purgatory,
 it locally contains or heaven or hell;
 there 's no third place in 't.
 duchess. how do you affect it?
 antonio. my banishment, feeding my melancholy,
 would often reason thus.
 duchess. pray, let 's hear it.
 antonio. say a man never marry, nor have children,
 what takes that from him? only the bare name
 of being a father, or the weak delight
 to see the little wanton ride a-cock-horse
 upon a painted stick, or hear him chatter
 like a taught starling.
 duchess. fie, fie, what 's all this?
 one of your eyes is blood-shot; use my ring to 't.
 they say 'tis very sovereign. 'twas my wedding-ring,
 and i did vow never to part with it
 but to my second husband.
 antonio. you have parted with it now.
 duchess. yes, to help your eye-sight.
 antonio. you have made me stark blind.
 duchess. how?
 antonio. there is a saucy and ambitious devil
 is dancing in this circle.
 duchess. remove him.
 antonio. how?
 duchess. there needs small conjuration, when your finger
 may do it: thus. is it fit?
 [she puts the ring upon his finger]: he kneels.
 antonio. what said you?
 duchess. sir,
 this goodly roof of yours is too low built;
 i cannot stand upright in 't nor discourse,
 without i raise it higher. raise yourself;
 or, if you please, my hand to help you: so.
 [raises him.]
 antonio. ambition, madam, is a great man's madness,
 that is not kept in chains and close-pent rooms,
 but in fair lightsome lodgings, and is girt
 with the wild noise of prattling visitants,
 which makes it lunatic beyond all cure.
 conceive not i am so stupid but i aim[]
 whereto your favours tend: but he 's a fool
 that, being a-cold, would thrust his hands i' the fire
 to warm them.
 duchess. so, now the ground 's broke,
 you may discover what a wealthy mine
 i make your lord of.
 antonio. o my unworthiness!
 duchess. you were ill to sell yourself:
 this dark'ning of your worth is not like that
 which tradesmen use i' the city; their false lights
 are to rid bad wares off: and i must tell you,
 if you will know where breathes a complete man
 (i speak it without flattery), turn your eyes,
 and progress through yourself.
 antonio. were there nor heaven nor hell,
 i should be honest: i have long serv'd virtue,
 and ne'er ta'en wages of her.
 duchess. now she pays it.
 the misery of us that are born great!
 we are forc'd to woo, because none dare woo us;
 and as a tyrant doubles with his words,
 and fearfully equivocates, so we
 are forc'd to express our violent passions
 in riddles and in dreams, and leave the path
 of simple virtue, which was never made
 to seem the thing it is not. go, go brag
 you have left me heartless; mine is in your bosom:
 i hope 'twill multiply love there. you do tremble:
 make not your heart so dead a piece of flesh,
 to fear more than to love me. sir, be confident:
 what is 't distracts you? this is flesh and blood, sir;
 'tis not the figure cut in alabaster
 kneels at my husband's tomb. awake, awake, man!
 i do here put off all vain ceremony,
 and only do appear to you a young widow
 that claims you for her husband, and, like a widow,
 i use but half a blush in 't.
 antonio. truth speak for me;
 i will remain the constant sanctuary
 of your good name.
 duchess. i thank you, gentle love:
 and 'cause you shall not come to me in debt,
 being now my steward, here upon your lips
 i sign your quietus est.[] this you should have begg'd now.
 i have seen children oft eat sweetmeats thus,
 as fearful to devour them too soon.
 antonio. but for your brothers?
 duchess. do not think of them:
 all discord without this circumference
 is only to be pitied, and not fear'd:
 yet, should they know it, time will easily
 scatter the tempest.
 antonio. these words should be mine,
 and all the parts you have spoke, if some part of it
 would not have savour'd flattery.
 duchess. kneel.
 [cariola comes from behind the arras.]
 antonio. ha!
 duchess. be not amaz'd; this woman 's of my counsel:
 i have heard lawyers say, a contract in a chamber
 per verba [de] presenti[] is absolute marriage.
 [she and antonio kneel.]
 bless, heaven, this sacred gordian[] which let violence
 never untwine!
 antonio. and may our sweet affections, like the spheres,
 be still in motion!
 duchess. quickening, and make
 the like soft music!
 antonio. that we may imitate the loving palms,
 best emblem of a peaceful marriage,
 that never bore fruit, divided!
 duchess. what can the church force more?
 antonio. that fortune may not know an accident,
 either of joy or sorrow, to divide
 our fixed wishes!
 duchess. how can the church build faster?[]
 we now are man and wife, and 'tis the church
 that must but echo this.—maid, stand apart:
 i now am blind.
 antonio. what 's your conceit in this?
 duchess. i would have you lead your fortune by the hand
 unto your marriage-bed:
 (you speak in me this, for we now are one:)
 we 'll only lie and talk together, and plot
 to appease my humorous[] kindred; and if you please,
 like the old tale in alexander and lodowick,
 lay a naked sword between us, keep us chaste.
 o, let me shrowd my blushes in your bosom,
 since 'tis the treasury of all my secrets!
 [exeunt duchess and antonio.]
 cariola. whether the spirit of greatness or of woman
 reign most in her, i know not; but it shows
 a fearful madness. i owe her much of pity.
 [exit.]
 act ii
 scene i[]
 [enter] bosola and castruccio
 bosola. you say you would fain be taken for an eminent courtier?
 castruccio. 'tis the very main[] of my ambition.
 bosola. let me see: you have a reasonable good face for 't already,
 and your night-cap expresses your ears sufficient largely. i would
 have you learn to twirl the strings of your band with a good grace,
 and in a set speech, at th' end of every sentence, to hum three
 or four times, or blow your nose till it smart again, to recover your
 memory. when you come to be a president in criminal causes, if you
 smile upon a prisoner, hang him; but if you frown upon him and
 threaten him, let him be sure to scape the gallows.
 castruccio. i would be a very merry president.
 bosola. do not sup o' nights; 'twill beget you an admirable wit.
 castruccio. rather it would make me have a good stomach to quarrel;
 for they say, your roaring boys eat meat seldom, and that makes them
 so valiant. but how shall i know whether the people take me for
 an eminent fellow?
 bosola. i will teach a trick to know it: give out you lie a-dying,
 and if you hear the common people curse you, be sure you are taken
 for one of the prime night-caps.[]
 [enter an old lady]
 you come from painting now.
 old lady. from what?
 bosola. why, from your scurvy face-physic. to behold thee not
 painted inclines somewhat near a miracle. these in thy face here
 were deep ruts and foul sloughs the last progress.[] there was
 a lady in france that, having had the small-pox, flayed the skin off
 her face to make it more level; and whereas before she looked
 like a nutmeg-grater, after she resembled an abortive hedge-hog.
 old lady. do you call this painting?
 bosola. no, no, but you call [it] careening[] of an old
 morphewed[] lady, to make her disembogue[] again:
 there 's rough-cast phrase to your plastic.[]
 old lady. it seems you are well acquainted with my closet.
 bosola. one would suspect it for a shop of witchcraft, to find in it
 the fat of serpents, spawn of snakes, jews' spittle, and their young
 children's ordure; and all these for the face. i would sooner eat
 a dead pigeon taken from the soles of the feet of one sick of the
 plague, than kiss one of you fasting. here are two of you, whose sin
 of your youth is the very patrimony of the physician; makes him renew
 his foot-cloth with the spring, and change his high-pric'd courtezan
 with the fall of the leaf. i do wonder you do not loathe yourselves.
 observe my meditation now.
 what thing is in this outward form of man
 to be belov'd? we account it ominous,
 if nature do produce a colt, or lamb,
 a fawn, or goat, in any limb resembling
 a man, and fly from 't as a prodigy:
 man stands amaz'd to see his deformity
 in any other creature but himself.
 but in our own flesh though we bear diseases
 which have their true names only ta'en from beasts,—
 as the most ulcerous wolf and swinish measle,—
 though we are eaten up of lice and worms,
 and though continually we bear about us
 a rotten and dead body, we delight
 to hide it in rich tissue: all our fear,
 nay, all our terror, is, lest our physician
 should put us in the ground to be made sweet.—
 your wife 's gone to rome: you two couple, and get you to
 the wells at lucca to recover your aches. i have other work on foot.
 [exeunt castruccio and old lady]
 i observe our duchess
 is sick a-days, she pukes, her stomach seethes,
 the fins of her eye-lids look most teeming blue,[]
 she wanes i' the cheek, and waxes fat i' the flank,
 and, contrary to our italian fashion,
 wears a loose-bodied gown: there 's somewhat in 't.
 i have a trick may chance discover it,
 a pretty one; i have bought some apricocks,
 the first our spring yields.
 [enter antonio and delio, talking together apart]
 delio. and so long since married?
 you amaze me.
 antonio. let me seal your lips for ever:
 for, did i think that anything but th' air
 could carry these words from you, i should wish
 you had no breath at all.—now, sir, in your contemplation?
 you are studying to become a great wise fellow.
 bosola. o, sir, the opinion of wisdom is a foul tetter[]
 that runs all over a man's body: if simplicity direct us to have
 no evil, it directs us to a happy being; for the subtlest folly
 proceeds from the subtlest wisdom: let me be simply honest.
 antonio. i do understand your inside.
 bosola. do you so?
 antonio. because you would not seem to appear to th' world
 puff'd up with your preferment, you continue
 this out-of-fashion melancholy: leave it, leave it.
 bosola. give me leave to be honest in any phrase, in any compliment
 whatsoever. shall i confess myself to you? i look no higher than
 i can reach: they are the gods that must ride on winged horses.
 a lawyer's mule of a slow pace will both suit my disposition and
 business; for, mark me, when a man's mind rides faster than his horse
 can gallop, they quickly both tire.
 antonio. you would look up to heaven, but i think
 the devil, that rules i' th' air, stands in your light.
 bosola. o, sir, you are lord of the ascendant,[] chief man with
 the duchess: a duke was your cousin-german remov'd. say you were
 lineally descended from king pepin, or he himself, what of this?
 search the heads of the greatest rivers in the world, you shall find
 them but bubbles of water. some would think the souls of princes
 were brought forth by some more weighty cause than those of meaner
 persons: they are deceiv'd, there 's the same hand to them; the like
 passions sway them; the same reason that makes a vicar go to law for
 a tithe-pig, and undo his neighbours, makes them spoil a whole
 province, and batter down goodly cities with the cannon.
 [enter duchess and ladies]
 duchess. your arm, antonio: do i not grow fat?
 i am exceeding short-winded.—bosola,
 i would have you, sir, provide for me a litter;
 such a one as the duchess of florence rode in.
 bosola. the duchess us'd one when she was great with child.
 duchess. i think she did.—come hither, mend my ruff:
 here, when? thou art such a tedious lady; and
 thy breath smells of lemon-pills: would thou hadst done!
 shall i swoon under thy fingers? i am
 so troubled with the mother![]
 bosola. [aside.] i fear too much.
 duchess. i have heard you say that the french courtiers
 wear their hats on 'fore that king.
 antonio. i have seen it.
 duchess. in the presence?
 antonio. yes.
 duchess. why should not we bring up that fashion?
 'tis ceremony more than duty that consists
 in the removing of a piece of felt.
 be you the example to the rest o' th' court;
 put on your hat first.
 antonio. you must pardon me:
 i have seen, in colder countries than in france,
 nobles stand bare to th' prince; and the distinction
 methought show'd reverently.
 bosola. i have a present for your grace.
 duchess. for me, sir?
 bosola. apricocks, madam.
 duchess. o, sir, where are they?
 i have heard of none to-year[]
 bosola. [aside.] good; her colour rises.
 duchess. indeed, i thank you: they are wondrous fair ones.
 what an unskilful fellow is our gardener!
 we shall have none this month.
 bosola. will not your grace pare them?
 duchess. no: they taste of musk, methinks; indeed they do.
 bosola. i know not: yet i wish your grace had par'd 'em.
 duchess. why?
 bosola. i forgot to tell you, the knave gardener,
 only to raise his profit by them the sooner,
 did ripen them in horse-dung.
 duchess. o, you jest.—
 you shall judge: pray, taste one.
 antonio. indeed, madam,
 i do not love the fruit.
 duchess. sir, you are loth
 to rob us of our dainties. 'tis a delicate fruit;
 they say they are restorative.
 bosola. 'tis a pretty art,
 this grafting.
 duchess. 'tis so; a bettering of nature.
 bosola. to make a pippin grow upon a crab,
 a damson on a black-thorn.—[aside.] how greedily she eats them!
 a whirlwind strike off these bawd farthingales!
 for, but for that and the loose-bodied gown,
 i should have discover'd apparently[]
 the young springal[] cutting a caper in her belly.
 duchess. i thank you, bosola: they were right good ones,
 if they do not make me sick.
 antonio. how now, madam!
 duchess. this green fruit and my stomach are not friends:
 how they swell me!
 bosola. [aside.] nay, you are too much swell'd already.
 duchess. o, i am in an extreme cold sweat!
 bosola. i am very sorry.
 [exit.]
 duchess. lights to my chamber!—o good antonio,
 i fear i am undone!
 delio. lights there, lights!
 exeunt duchess [and ladies.]
 antonio. o my most trusty delio, we are lost!
 i fear she 's fall'n in labour; and there 's left
 no time for her remove.
 delio. have you prepar'd
 those ladies to attend her; and procur'd
 that politic safe conveyance for the midwife
 your duchess plotted?
 antonio. i have.
 delio. make use, then, of this forc'd occasion.
 give out that bosola hath poison'd her
 with these apricocks; that will give some colour
 for her keeping close.
 antonio. fie, fie, the physicians
 will then flock to her.
 delio. for that you may pretend
 she'll use some prepar'd antidote of her own,
 lest the physicians should re-poison her.
 antonio. i am lost in amazement: i know not what to think on 't.
 exeunt.
 scene ii[]
 [enter] bosola and old lady
 bosola. so, so, there 's no question but her techiness[]
 and most vulturous eating of the apricocks are apparent signs
 of breeding, now?
 old lady. i am in haste, sir.
 bosola. there was a young waiting-woman had a monstrous desire
 to see the glass-house——
 old lady. nay, pray, let me go. i will hear no more
 of the glass-house. you are still[] abusing women!
 bosola. who, i? no; only, by the way now and then, mention your
 frailties. the orange-tree bears ripe and green fruit and blossoms
 all together; and some of you give entertainment for pure love,
 but more for more precious reward. the lusty spring smells well;
 but drooping autumn tastes well. if we have the same golden showers
 that rained in the time of jupiter the thunderer, you have the same
 danaes still, to hold up their laps to receive them. didst thou
 never study the mathematics?
 old lady. what 's that, sir?
 bosola. why, to know the trick how to make a many lines meet in one
 centre. go, go, give your foster-daughters good counsel: tell them,
 that the devil takes delight to hang at a woman's girdle, like
 a false rusty watch, that she cannot discern how the time passes.
 [exit old lady.]
 [enter antonio, roderigo, and grisolan]
 antonio. shut up the court-gates.
 roderigo. why, sir? what 's the danger?
 antonio. shut up the posterns presently, and call
 all the officers o' th' court.
 grisolan. i shall instantly.
 [exit.]
 antonio. who keeps the key o' th' park-gate?
 roderigo. forobosco.
 antonio. let him bring 't presently.
 [re-enter grisolan with servants]
 first servant. o, gentleman o' th' court, the foulest treason!
 bosola. [aside.] if that these apricocks should be poison'd now,
 without my knowledge?
 there was taken even now a switzer in the duchess' bed-chamber——
 second servant. a switzer!
 first servant. with a pistol——
 second servant. there was a cunning traitor!
 and all the moulds of his buttons were leaden bullets.
 second servant. o wicked cannibal!
 first servant. 'twas a french plot, upon my life.
 second servant. to see what the devil can do!
 antonio. [are] all the officers here?
 servants. we are.
 antonio. gentlemen,
 we have lost much plate, you know; and but this evening
 jewels, to the value of four thousand ducats,
 are missing in the duchess' cabinet.
 are the gates shut?
 servant. yes.
 antonio. 'tis the duchess' pleasure
 each officer be lock'd into his chamber
 till the sun-rising; and to send the keys
 of all their chests and of their outward doors
 into her bed-chamber. she is very sick.
 roderigo. at her pleasure.
 antonio. she entreats you take 't not ill: the innocent
 shall be the more approv'd by it.
 bosola. gentlemen o' the wood-yard, where 's your switzer now?
 first servant. by this hand, 'twas credibly reported by one
 o' the black guard.[]
 [exeunt all except antonio and delio.]
 delio. how fares it with the duchess?
 antonio. she 's expos'd
 unto the worst of torture, pain, and fear.
 delio. speak to her all happy comfort.
 antonio. how i do play the fool with mine own danger!
 you are this night, dear friend, to post to rome:
 my life lies in your service.
 delio. do not doubt me.
 antonio. o, 'tis far from me: and yet fear presents me
 somewhat that looks like danger.
 delio. believe it,
 'tis but the shadow of your fear, no more:
 how superstitiously we mind our evils!
 the throwing down salt, or crossing of a hare,
 bleeding at nose, the stumbling of a horse,
 or singing of a cricket, are of power
 to daunt whole man in us. sir, fare you well:
 i wish you all the joys of a bless'd father;
 and, for my faith, lay this unto your breast,—
 old friends, like old swords, still are trusted best.
 [exit.]
 [enter cariola]
 cariola. sir, you are the happy father of a son:
 your wife commends him to you.
 antonio. blessed comfort!—
 for heaven' sake, tend her well: i 'll presently[]
 go set a figure for 's nativity.[]
 exeunt.
 scene iii[]
 [enter bosola, with a dark lantern]
 bosola. sure i did hear a woman shriek: list, ha!
 and the sound came, if i receiv'd it right,
 ]from the duchess' lodgings. there 's some stratagem
 in the confining all our courtiers
 to their several wards: i must have part of it;
 my intelligence will freeze else. list, again!
 it may be 'twas the melancholy bird,
 best friend of silence and of solitariness,
 the owl, that screamed so.—ha! antonio!
 [enter antonio with a candle, his sword drawn]
 antonio. i heard some noise.—who 's there? what art thou? speak.
 bosola. antonio, put not your face nor body
 to such a forc'd expression of fear;
 i am bosola, your friend.
 antonio. bosola!—
 [aside.] this mole does undermine me.—heard you not
 a noise even now?
 bosola. from whence?
 antonio. from the duchess' lodging.
 bosola. not i: did you?
 antonio. i did, or else i dream'd.
 bosola. let 's walk towards it.
 antonio. no: it may be 'twas
 but the rising of the wind.
 bosola. very likely.
 methinks 'tis very cold, and yet you sweat:
 you look wildly.
 antonio. i have been setting a figure[]
 for the duchess' jewels.
 bosola. ah, and how falls your question?
 do you find it radical?[]
 antonio. what 's that to you?
 'tis rather to be question'd what design,
 when all men were commanded to their lodgings,
 makes you a night-walker.
 bosola. in sooth, i 'll tell you:
 now all the court 's asleep, i thought the devil
 had least to do here; i came to say my prayers;
 and if it do offend you i do so,
 you are a fine courtier.
 antonio. [aside.] this fellow will undo me.—
 you gave the duchess apricocks to-day:
 pray heaven they were not poison'd!
 bosola. poison'd! a spanish fig
 for the imputation!
 antonio. traitors are ever confident
 till they are discover'd. there were jewels stol'n too:
 in my conceit, none are to be suspected
 more than yourself.
 bosola. you are a false steward.
 antonio. saucy slave, i 'll pull thee up by the roots.
 bosola. may be the ruin will crush you to pieces.
 antonio. you are an impudent snake indeed, sir:
 are you scarce warm, and do you show your sting?
 you libel[] well, sir?
 bosola. no, sir: copy it out,
 and i will set my hand to 't.
 antonio. [aside.] my nose bleeds.
 one that were superstitious would count
 this ominous, when it merely comes by chance.
 two letters, that are wrought here for my name,[]
 are drown'd in blood!
 mere accident.—for you, sir, i 'll take order
 i' the morn you shall be safe.—[aside.] 'tis that must colour
 her lying-in.—sir, this door you pass not:
 i do not hold it fit that you come near
 the duchess' lodgings, till you have quit yourself.—
 [aside.] the great are like the base, nay, they are the same,
 when they seek shameful ways to avoid shame.
 exit.
 bosola. antonio hereabout did drop a paper:—
 some of your help, false friend.[]—o, here it is.
 what 's here? a child's nativity calculated!
 [reads.]
 'the duchess was deliver'd of a son, 'tween the hours
 twelve and one in the night, anno dom. ,'—that 's
 this year—'decimo nono decembris,'—that 's this night—
 'taken according to the meridian of malfi,'—that 's our
 duchess: happy discovery!—'the lord of the first house
 being combust in the ascendant, signifies short life;
 and mars being in a human sign, joined to the tail of the
 dragon, in the eighth house, doth threaten a violent death.
 caetera non scrutantur.'[]
 why, now 'tis most apparent; this precise fellow
 is the duchess' bawd:—i have it to my wish!
 this is a parcel of intelligency[]
 our courtiers were cas'd up for: it needs must follow
 that i must be committed on pretence
 of poisoning her; which i 'll endure, and laugh at.
 if one could find the father now! but that
 time will discover. old castruccio
 i' th' morning posts to rome: by him i 'll send
 a letter that shall make her brothers' galls
 o'erflow their livers. this was a thrifty[] way!
 though lust do mask in ne'er so strange disguise,
 she 's oft found witty, but is never wise.
 [exit.]
 scene iv[]
 [enter] cardinal and julia
 cardinal. sit: thou art my best of wishes. prithee, tell me
 what trick didst thou invent to come to rome
 without thy husband?
 julia. why, my lord, i told him
 i came to visit an old anchorite[]
 here for devotion.
 cardinal. thou art a witty false one,—
 i mean, to him.
 julia. you have prevail'd with me
 beyond my strongest thoughts; i would not now
 find you inconstant.
 cardinal. do not put thyself
 to such a voluntary torture, which proceeds
 out of your own guilt.
 julia. how, my lord!
 cardinal. you fear
 my constancy, because you have approv'd[]
 those giddy and wild turnings in yourself.
 julia. did you e'er find them?
 cardinal. sooth, generally for women,
 a man might strive to make glass malleable,
 ere he should make them fixed.
 julia. so, my lord.
 cardinal. we had need go borrow that fantastic glass
 invented by galileo the florentine
 to view another spacious world i' th' moon,
 and look to find a constant woman there.
 julia. this is very well, my lord.
 cardinal. why do you weep?
 are tears your justification? the self-same tears
 will fall into your husband's bosom, lady,
 with a loud protestation that you love him
 above the world. come, i 'll love you wisely,
 that 's jealously; since i am very certain
 you cannot make me cuckold.
 julia. i 'll go home
 to my husband.
 cardinal. you may thank me, lady,
 i have taken you off your melancholy perch,
 bore you upon my fist, and show'd you game,
 and let you fly at it.—i pray thee, kiss me.—
 when thou wast with thy husband, thou wast watch'd
 like a tame elephant:—still you are to thank me:—
 thou hadst only kisses from him and high feeding;
 but what delight was that? 'twas just like one
 that hath a little fing'ring on the lute,
 yet cannot tune it:—still you are to thank me.
 julia. you told me of a piteous wound i' th' heart,
 and a sick liver, when you woo'd me first,
 and spake like one in physic.[]
 cardinal. who 's that?——
 [enter servant]
 rest firm, for my affection to thee,
 lightning moves slow to 't.
 servant. madam, a gentleman,
 that 's come post from malfi, desires to see you.
 cardinal. let him enter: i 'll withdraw.
 exit.
 servant. he says
 your husband, old castruccio, is come to rome,
 most pitifully tir'd with riding post.
 [exit.]
 [enter delio]
 julia. [aside.] signior delio! 'tis one of my old suitors.
 delio. i was bold to come and see you.
 julia. sir, you are welcome.
 delio. do you lie here?
 julia. sure, your own experience
 will satisfy you no: our roman prelates
 do not keep lodging for ladies.
 delio. very well:
 i have brought you no commendations from your husband,
 for i know none by him.
 julia. i hear he 's come to rome.
 delio. i never knew man and beast, of a horse and a knight,
 so weary of each other. if he had had a good back,
 he would have undertook to have borne his horse,
 his breech was so pitifully sore.
 julia. your laughter
 is my pity.
 delio. lady, i know not whether
 you want money, but i have brought you some.
 julia. from my husband?
 delio. no, from mine own allowance.
 julia. i must hear the condition, ere i be bound to take it.
 delio. look on 't, 'tis gold; hath it not a fine colour?
 julia. i have a bird more beautiful.
 delio. try the sound on 't.
 julia. a lute-string far exceeds it.
 it hath no smell, like cassia or civet;
 nor is it physical,[] though some fond doctors
 persuade us seethe 't in cullises.[] i 'll tell you,
 this is a creature bred by——
 [re-enter servant]
 servant. your husband 's come,
 hath deliver'd a letter to the duke of calabria
 that, to my thinking, hath put him out of his wits.
 [exit.]
 julia. sir, you hear:
 pray, let me know your business and your suit
 as briefly as can be.
 delio. with good speed: i would wish you,
 at such time as you are non-resident
 with your husband, my mistress.
 julia. sir, i 'll go ask my husband if i shall,
 and straight return your answer.
 exit.
 delio. very fine!
 is this her wit, or honesty, that speaks thus?
 i heard one say the duke was highly mov'd
 with a letter sent from malfi. i do fear
 antonio is betray'd. how fearfully
 shows his ambition now! unfortunate fortune!
 they pass through whirl-pools, and deep woes do shun,
 who the event weigh ere the action 's done.
 exit.
 scene v[]
 [enter] cardinal and ferdinand with a letter
 ferdinand. i have this night digg'd up a mandrake.[]
 cardinal. say you?
 ferdinand. and i am grown mad with 't.
 cardinal. what 's the prodigy[?]
 read there,—a sister damn'd: she 's loose i' the hilts;[]
 grown a notorious strumpet.
 cardinal. speak lower.
 ferdinand. lower!
 rogues do not whisper 't now, but seek to publish 't
 (as servants do the bounty of their lords)
 aloud; and with a covetous searching eye,
 to mark who note them. o, confusion seize her!
 she hath had most cunning bawds to serve her turn,
 and more secure conveyances for lust
 than towns of garrison for service.
 cardinal. is 't possible?
 can this be certain?
 ferdinand. rhubarb, o, for rhubarb
 to purge this choler! here 's the cursed day
 to prompt my memory; and here 't shall stick
 till of her bleeding heart i make a sponge
 to wipe it out.
 cardinal. why do you make yourself
 so wild a tempest?
 ferdinand. would i could be one,
 that i might toss her palace 'bout her ears,
 root up her goodly forests, blast her meads,
 and lay her general territory as waste
 as she hath done her honours.
 cardinal. shall our blood,
 the royal blood of arragon and castile,
 be thus attainted?
 ferdinand. apply desperate physic:
 we must not now use balsamum, but fire,
 the smarting cupping-glass, for that 's the mean
 to purge infected blood, such blood as hers.
 there is a kind of pity in mine eye,—
 i 'll give it to my handkercher; and now 'tis here,
 i 'll bequeath this to her bastard.
 cardinal. what to do?
 ferdinand. why, to make soft lint for his mother's wounds,
 when i have hew'd her to pieces.
 cardinal. curs'd creature!
 unequal nature, to place women's hearts
 so far upon the left side![]
 ferdinand. foolish men,
 that e'er will trust their honour in a bark
 made of so slight weak bulrush as is woman,
 apt every minute to sink it!
 cardinal. thus ignorance, when it hath purchas'd honour,
 it cannot wield it.
 ferdinand. methinks i see her laughing,—
 excellent hyena! talk to me somewhat quickly,
 or my imagination will carry me
 to see her in the shameful act of sin.
 cardinal. with whom?
 ferdinand. happily with some strong-thigh'd bargeman,
 or one o' th' wood-yard that can quoit the sledge[]
 or toss the bar, or else some lovely squire
 that carries coals up to her privy lodgings.
 cardinal. you fly beyond your reason.
 ferdinand. go to, mistress!
 'tis not your whore's milk that shall quench my wild-fire,
 but your whore's blood.
 cardinal. how idly shows this rage, which carries you,
 as men convey'd by witches through the air,
 on violent whirlwinds! this intemperate noise
 fitly resembles deaf men's shrill discourse,
 who talk aloud, thinking all other men
 to have their imperfection.
 ferdinand. have not you
 my palsy?
 cardinal. yes, [but] i can be angry
 without this rupture. there is not in nature
 a thing that makes man so deform'd, so beastly,
 as doth intemperate anger. chide yourself.
 you have divers men who never yet express'd
 their strong desire of rest but by unrest,
 by vexing of themselves. come, put yourself
 in tune.
 ferdinand. so i will only study to seem
 the thing i am not. i could kill her now,
 in you, or in myself; for i do think
 it is some sin in us heaven doth revenge
 by her.
 cardinal. are you stark mad?
 ferdinand. i would have their bodies
 burnt in a coal-pit with the ventage stopp'd,
 that their curs'd smoke might not ascend to heaven;
 or dip the sheets they lie in in pitch or sulphur,
 wrap them in 't, and then light them like a match;
 or else to-boil[] their bastard to a cullis,
 and give 't his lecherous father to renew
 the sin of his back.
 cardinal. i 'll leave you.
 ferdinand. nay, i have done.
 i am confident, had i been damn'd in hell,
 and should have heard of this, it would have put me
 into a cold sweat. in, in; i 'll go sleep.
 till i know who [loves] my sister, i 'll not stir:
 that known, i 'll find scorpions to string my whips,
 and fix her in a general eclipse.
 exeunt.
 act iii
 scene i[]
 [enter] antonio and delio
 antonio. our noble friend, my most beloved delio!
 o, you have been a stranger long at court:
 came you along with the lord ferdinand?
 delio. i did, sir: and how fares your noble duchess?
 antonio. right fortunately well: she 's an excellent
 feeder of pedigrees; since you last saw her,
 she hath had two children more, a son and daughter.
 delio. methinks 'twas yesterday. let me but wink,
 and not behold your face, which to mine eye
 is somewhat leaner, verily i should dream
 it were within this half hour.
 antonio. you have not been in law, friend delio,
 nor in prison, nor a suitor at the court,
 nor begg'd the reversion of some great man's place,
 nor troubled with an old wife, which doth make
 your time so insensibly hasten.
 delio. pray, sir, tell me,
 hath not this news arriv'd yet to the ear
 of the lord cardinal?
 antonio. i fear it hath:
 the lord ferdinand, that 's newly come to court,
 doth bear himself right dangerously.
 delio. pray, why?
 antonio. he is so quiet that he seems to sleep
 the tempest out, as dormice do in winter.
 those houses that are haunted are most still
 till the devil be up.
 delio. what say the common people?
 antonio. the common rabble do directly say
 she is a strumpet.
 delio. and your graver heads
 which would be politic, what censure they?
 antonio. they do observe i grow to infinite purchase,[]
 the left hand way; and all suppose the duchess
 would amend it, if she could; for, say they,
 great princes, though they grudge their officers
 should have such large and unconfined means
 to get wealth under them, will not complain,
 lest thereby they should make them odious
 unto the people. for other obligation
 of love or marriage between her and me
 they never dream of.
 delio. the lord ferdinand
 is going to bed.
 [enter duchess, ferdinand, and attendants]
 ferdinand. i 'll instantly to bed,
 for i am weary.—i am to bespeak
 a husband for you.
 duchess. for me, sir! pray, who is 't?
 ferdinand. the great count malatesti.
 duchess. fie upon him!
 a count! he 's a mere stick of sugar-candy;
 you may look quite through him. when i choose
 a husband, i will marry for your honour.
 ferdinand. you shall do well in 't.—how is 't, worthy antonio?
 duchess. but, sir, i am to have private conference with you
 about a scandalous report is spread
 touching mine honour.
 ferdinand. let me be ever deaf to 't:
 one of pasquil's paper-bullets,[] court-calumny,
 a pestilent air, which princes' palaces
 are seldom purg'd of. yet, say that it were true,
 i pour it in your bosom, my fix'd love
 would strongly excuse, extenuate, nay, deny
 faults, were they apparent in you. go, be safe
 in your own innocency.
 duchess. [aside.] o bless'd comfort!
 this deadly air is purg'd.
 exeunt [duchess, antonio, delio, and attendants.]
 ferdinand. her guilt treads on
 hot-burning coulters.[]
 enter bosola
 now, bosola,
 how thrives our intelligence?[]
 bosola. sir, uncertainly:
 'tis rumour'd she hath had three bastards, but
 by whom we may go read i' the stars.
 ferdinand. why, some
 hold opinion all things are written there.
 bosola. yes, if we could find spectacles to read them.
 i do suspect there hath been some sorcery
 us'd on the duchess.
 ferdinand. sorcery! to what purpose?
 bosola. to make her dote on some desertless fellow
 she shames to acknowledge.
 ferdinand. can your faith give way
 to think there 's power in potions or in charms,
 to make us love whether we will or no?
 bosola. most certainly.
 ferdinand. away! these are mere gulleries,[] horrid things,
 invented by some cheating mountebanks
 to abuse us. do you think that herbs or charms
 can force the will? some trials have been made
 in this foolish practice, but the ingredients
 were lenitive[] poisons, such as are of force
 to make the patient mad; and straight the witch
 swears by equivocation they are in love.
 the witch-craft lies in her rank blood. this night
 i will force confession from her. you told me
 you had got, within these two days, a false key
 into her bed-chamber.
 bosola. i have.
 ferdinand. as i would wish.
 bosola. what do you intend to do?
 ferdinand. can you guess?
 bosola. no.
 ferdinand. do not ask, then:
 he that can compass me, and know my drifts,
 may say he hath put a girdle 'bout the world,
 and sounded all her quick-sands.
 bosola. i do not
 think so.
 ferdinand. what do you think, then, pray?
 bosola. that you
 are your own chronicle too much, and grossly
 flatter yourself.
 ferdinand. give me thy hand; i thank thee:
 i never gave pension but to flatterers,
 till i entertained thee. farewell.
 that friend a great man's ruin strongly checks,
 who rails into his belief all his defects.
 exeunt.
 scene ii[]
 [enter] duchess, antonio, and cariola
 duchess. bring me the casket hither, and the glass.—
 you get no lodging here to-night, my lord.
 antonio. indeed, i must persuade one.
 duchess. very good:
 i hope in time 'twill grow into a custom,
 that noblemen shall come with cap and knee
 to purchase a night's lodging of their wives.
 antonio. i must lie here.
 duchess. must! you are a lord of mis-rule.
 antonio. indeed, my rule is only in the night.
 duchess. i 'll stop your mouth.
 [kisses him.]
 antonio. nay, that 's but one; venus had two soft doves
 to draw her chariot; i must have another.—
 [she kisses him again.]
 when wilt thou marry, cariola?
 cariola. never, my lord.
 antonio. o, fie upon this single life! forgo it.
 we read how daphne, for her peevish [flight,][]
 became a fruitless bay-tree; syrinx turn'd
 to the pale empty reed; anaxarete
 was frozen into marble: whereas those
 which married, or prov'd kind unto their friends,
 were by a gracious influence transhap'd
 into the olive, pomegranate, mulberry,
 became flowers, precious stones, or eminent stars.
 cariola. this is a vain poetry: but i pray you, tell me,
 if there were propos'd me, wisdom, riches, and beauty,
 in three several young men, which should i choose?
 antonio. 'tis a hard question. this was paris' case,
 and he was blind in 't, and there was a great cause;
 for how was 't possible he could judge right,
 having three amorous goddesses in view,
 and they stark naked? 'twas a motion
 were able to benight the apprehension
 of the severest counsellor of europe.
 now i look on both your faces so well form'd,
 it puts me in mind of a question i would ask.
 cariola. what is 't?
 antonio. i do wonder why hard-favour'd ladies,
 for the most part, keep worse-favour'd waiting-women
 to attend them, and cannot endure fair ones.
 duchess. o, that 's soon answer'd.
 did you ever in your life know an ill painter
 desire to have his dwelling next door to the shop
 of an excellent picture-maker? 'twould disgrace
 his face-making, and undo him. i prithee,
 when were we so merry?—my hair tangles.
 antonio. pray thee, cariola, let 's steal forth the room,
 and let her talk to herself: i have divers times
 serv'd her the like, when she hath chaf'd extremely.
 i love to see her angry. softly, cariola.
 exeunt [antonio and cariola.]
 duchess. doth not the colour of my hair 'gin to change?
 when i wax gray, i shall have all the court
 powder their hair with arras,[] to be like me.
 you have cause to love me; i ent'red you into my heart
 [enter ferdinand unseen]
 before you would vouchsafe to call for the keys.
 we shall one day have my brothers take you napping.
 methinks his presence, being now in court,
 should make you keep your own bed; but you 'll say
 love mix'd with fear is sweetest. i 'll assure you,
 you shall get no more children till my brothers
 consent to be your gossips. have you lost your tongue?
 'tis welcome:
 for know, whether i am doom'd to live or die,
 i can do both like a prince.
 ferdinand. die, then, quickly!
 giving her a poniard.
 virtue, where art thou hid? what hideous thing
 is it that doth eclipse thee?
 duchess. pray, sir, hear me.
 ferdinand. or is it true thou art but a bare name,
 and no essential thing?
 duchess. sir——
 ferdinand. do not speak.
 duchess. no, sir:
 i will plant my soul in mine ears, to hear you.
 ferdinand. o most imperfect light of human reason,
 that mak'st [us] so unhappy to foresee
 what we can least prevent! pursue thy wishes,
 and glory in them: there 's in shame no comfort
 but to be past all bounds and sense of shame.
 duchess. i pray, sir, hear me: i am married.
 ferdinand. so!
 duchess. happily, not to your liking: but for that,
 alas, your shears do come untimely now
 to clip the bird's wings that 's already flown!
 will you see my husband?
 ferdinand. yes, if i could change
 eyes with a basilisk.
 duchess. sure, you came hither
 by his confederacy.
 ferdinand. the howling of a wolf
 is music to thee, screech-owl: prithee, peace.—
 whate'er thou art that hast enjoy'd my sister,
 for i am sure thou hear'st me, for thine own sake
 let me not know thee. i came hither prepar'd
 to work thy discovery; yet am now persuaded
 it would beget such violent effects
 as would damn us both. i would not for ten millions
 i had beheld thee: therefore use all means
 i never may have knowledge of thy name;
 enjoy thy lust still, and a wretched life,
 on that condition.—and for thee, vile woman,
 if thou do wish thy lecher may grow old
 in thy embracements, i would have thee build
 such a room for him as our anchorites
 to holier use inhabit. let not the sun
 shine on him till he 's dead; let dogs and monkeys
 only converse with him, and such dumb things
 to whom nature denies use to sound his name;
 do not keep a paraquito, lest she learn it;
 if thou do love him, cut out thine own tongue,
 lest it bewray him.
 duchess. why might not i marry?
 i have not gone about in this to create
 any new world or custom.
 ferdinand. thou art undone;
 and thou hast ta'en that massy sheet of lead
 that hid thy husband's bones, and folded it
 about my heart.
 duchess. mine bleeds for 't.
 ferdinand. thine! thy heart!
 what should i name 't unless a hollow bullet
 fill'd with unquenchable wild-fire?
 duchess. you are in this
 too strict; and were you not my princely brother,
 i would say, too wilful: my reputation
 is safe.
 ferdinand. dost thou know what reputation is?
 i 'll tell thee,—to small purpose, since the instruction
 comes now too late.
 upon a time reputation, love, and death,
 would travel o'er the world; and it was concluded
 that they should part, and take three several ways.
 death told them, they should find him in great battles,
 or cities plagu'd with plagues: love gives them counsel
 to inquire for him 'mongst unambitious shepherds,
 where dowries were not talk'd of, and sometimes
 'mongst quiet kindred that had nothing left
 by their dead parents: 'stay,' quoth reputation,
 'do not forsake me; for it is my nature,
 if once i part from any man i meet,
 i am never found again.' and so for you:
 you have shook hands with reputation,
 and made him invisible. so, fare you well:
 i will never see you more.
 duchess. why should only i,
 of all the other princes of the world,
 be cas'd up, like a holy relic? i have youth
 and a little beauty.
 ferdinand. so you have some virgins
 that are witches. i will never see thee more.
 exit.
 re-enter antonio with a pistol, [and cariola]
 duchess. you saw this apparition?
 antonio. yes: we are
 betray'd. how came he hither? i should turn
 this to thee, for that.
 cariola. pray, sir, do; and when
 that you have cleft my heart, you shall read there
 mine innocence.
 duchess. that gallery gave him entrance.
 antonio. i would this terrible thing would come again,
 that, standing on my guard, i might relate
 my warrantable love.—
 (she shows the poniard.)
 ha! what means this?
 duchess. he left this with me.
 antonio. and it seems did wish
 you would use it on yourself.
 duchess. his action seem'd
 to intend so much.
 antonio. this hath a handle to 't,
 as well as a point: turn it towards him, and
 so fasten the keen edge in his rank gall.
 [knocking within.]
 how now! who knocks? more earthquakes?
 duchess. i stand
 as if a mine beneath my feet were ready
 to be blown up.
 cariola. 'tis bosola.
 duchess. away!
 o misery! methinks unjust actions
 should wear these masks and curtains, and not we.
 you must instantly part hence: i have fashion'd it already.
 exit antonio.
 enter bosola
 bosola. the duke your brother is ta'en up in a whirlwind;
 hath took horse, and 's rid post to rome.
 duchess. so late?
 bosola. he told me, as he mounted into the saddle,
 you were undone.
 duchess. indeed, i am very near it.
 bosola. what 's the matter?
 duchess. antonio, the master of our household,
 hath dealt so falsely with me in 's accounts.
 my brother stood engag'd with me for money
 ta'en up of certain neapolitan jews,
 and antonio lets the bonds be forfeit.
 bosola. strange!—[aside.] this is cunning.
 duchess. and hereupon
 my brother's bills at naples are protested
 against.—call up our officers.
 bosola. i shall.
 exit.
 [re-enter antonio]
 duchess. the place that you must fly to is ancona:
 hire a house there; i 'll send after you
 my treasure and my jewels. our weak safety
 runs upon enginous wheels:[] short syllables
 must stand for periods. i must now accuse you
 of such a feigned crime as tasso calls
 magnanima menzogna, a noble lie,
 'cause it must shield our honours.—hark! they are coming.
 [re-enter bosola and officers]
 antonio. will your grace hear me?
 duchess. i have got well by you; you have yielded me
 a million of loss: i am like to inherit
 the people's curses for your stewardship.
 you had the trick in audit-time to be sick,
 till i had sign'd your quietus;[] and that cur'd you
 without help of a doctor.—gentlemen,
 i would have this man be an example to you all;
 so shall you hold my favour; i pray, let him;
 for h'as done that, alas, you would not think of,
 and, because i intend to be rid of him,
 i mean not to publish.—use your fortune elsewhere.
 antonio. i am strongly arm'd to brook my overthrow,
 as commonly men bear with a hard year.
 i will not blame the cause on 't; but do think
 the necessity of my malevolent star
 procures this, not her humour. o, the inconstant
 and rotten ground of service! you may see,
 'tis even like him, that in a winter night,
 takes a long slumber o'er a dying fire,
 a-loth to part from 't; yet parts thence as cold
 as when he first sat down.
 duchess. we do confiscate,
 towards the satisfying of your accounts,
 all that you have.
 antonio. i am all yours; and 'tis very fit
 all mine should be so.
 duchess. so, sir, you have your pass.
 antonio. you may see, gentlemen, what 'tis to serve
 a prince with body and soul.
 exit.
 bosola. here 's an example for extortion: what moisture is drawn
 out of the sea, when foul weather comes, pours down, and runs into
 the sea again.
 duchess. i would know what are your opinions
 of this antonio.
 second officer. he could not abide to see a pig's head gaping:
 i thought your grace would find him a jew.
 third officer. i would you had been his officer, for your own sake.
 fourth officer. you would have had more money.
 first officer. he stopped his ears with black wool, and to those came
 to him for money said he was thick of hearing.
 second officer. some said he was an hermaphrodite, for he could not
 abide a woman.
 fourth officer. how scurvy proud he would look when the treasury
 was full! well, let him go.
 first officer. yes, and the chippings of the buttery fly after him,
 to scour his gold chain.[]
 duchess. leave us.
 exeunt [officers.]
 what do you think of these?
 bosola. that these are rogues that in 's prosperity,
 but to have waited on his fortune, could have wish'd
 his dirty stirrup riveted through their noses,
 and follow'd after 's mule, like a bear in a ring;
 would have prostituted their daughters to his lust;
 made their first-born intelligencers;[] thought none happy
 but such as were born under his blest planet,
 and wore his livery: and do these lice drop off now?
 well, never look to have the like again:
 he hath left a sort[] of flattering rogues behind him;
 their doom must follow. princes pay flatterers
 in their own money: flatterers dissemble their vices,
 and they dissemble their lies; that 's justice.
 alas, poor gentleman!
 duchess. poor! he hath amply fill'd his coffers.
 bosola. sure, he was too honest. pluto,[] the god of riches,
 when he 's sent by jupiter to any man,
 he goes limping, to signify that wealth
 that comes on god's name comes slowly; but when he's sent
 on the devil's errand, he rides post and comes in by scuttles.[]
 let me show you what a most unvalu'd jewel
 you have in a wanton humour thrown away,
 to bless the man shall find him. he was an excellent
 courtier and most faithful; a soldier that thought it
 as beastly to know his own value too little
 as devilish to acknowledge it too much.
 both his virtue and form deserv'd a far better fortune:
 his discourse rather delighted to judge itself than show itself:
 his breast was fill'd with all perfection,
 and yet it seemed a private whisp'ring-room,
 it made so little noise of 't.
 duchess. but he was basely descended.
 bosola. will you make yourself a mercenary herald,
 rather to examine men's pedigrees than virtues?
 you shall want[] him:
 for know an honest statesman to a prince
 is like a cedar planted by a spring;
 the spring bathes the tree's root, the grateful tree
 rewards it with his shadow: you have not done so.
 i would sooner swim to the bermoothes on
 two politicians' rotten bladders, tied
 together with an intelligencer's heart-string,
 than depend on so changeable a prince's favour.
 fare thee well, antonio! since the malice of the world
 would needs down with thee, it cannot be said yet
 that any ill happen'd unto thee, considering thy fall
 was accompanied with virtue.
 duchess. o, you render me excellent music!
 bosola. say you?
 duchess. this good one that you speak of is my husband.
 bosola. do i not dream? can this ambitious age
 have so much goodness in 't as to prefer
 a man merely for worth, without these shadows
 of wealth and painted honours? possible?
 duchess. i have had three children by him.
 bosola. fortunate lady!
 for you have made your private nuptial bed
 the humble and fair seminary of peace,
 no question but: many an unbenefic'd scholar
 shall pray for you for this deed, and rejoice
 that some preferment in the world can yet
 arise from merit. the virgins of your land
 that have no dowries shall hope your example
 will raise them to rich husbands. should you want
 soldiers, 'twould make the very turks and moors
 turn christians, and serve you for this act.
 last, the neglected poets of your time,
 in honour of this trophy of a man,
 rais'd by that curious engine, your white hand,
 shall thank you, in your grave, for 't; and make that
 more reverend than all the cabinets
 of living princes. for antonio,
 his fame shall likewise flow from many a pen,
 when heralds shall want coats to sell to men.
 duchess. as i taste comfort in this friendly speech,
 so would i find concealment.
 bosola. o, the secret of my prince,
 which i will wear on th' inside of my heart!
 duchess. you shall take charge of all my coin and jewels,
 and follow him; for he retires himself
 to ancona.
 bosola. so.
 duchess. whither, within few days,
 i mean to follow thee.
 bosola. let me think:
 i would wish your grace to feign a pilgrimage
 to our lady of loretto, scarce seven leagues
 ]from fair ancona; so may you depart
 your country with more honour, and your flight
 will seem a princely progress, retaining
 your usual train about you.
 duchess. sir, your direction
 shall lead me by the hand.
 cariola. in my opinion,
 she were better progress to the baths at lucca,
 or go visit the spa
 in germany; for, if you will believe me,
 i do not like this jesting with religion,
 this feigned pilgrimage.
 duchess. thou art a superstitious fool:
 prepare us instantly for our departure.
 past sorrows, let us moderately lament them,
 for those to come, seek wisely to prevent them.
 [exeunt duchess and cariola.]
 bosola. a politician is the devil's quilted anvil;
 he fashions all sins on him, and the blows
 are never heard: he may work in a lady's chamber,
 as here for proof. what rests[] but i reveal
 all to my lord? o, this base quality[]
 of intelligencer! why, every quality i' the world
 prefers but gain or commendation:
 now, for this act i am certain to be rais'd,
 and men that paint weeds to the life are prais'd.
 [exit.]
 scene iii[]
 [enter] cardinal, ferdinand, malatesti, pescara, delio,
 and silvio
 cardinal. must we turn soldier, then?
 malatesti. the emperor,
 hearing your worth that way, ere you attain'd
 this reverend garment, joins you in commission
 with the right fortunate soldier the marquis of pescara,
 and the famous lannoy.
 cardinal. he that had the honour
 of taking the french king prisoner?
 malatesti. the same.
 here 's a plot drawn for a new fortification
 at naples.
 ferdinand. this great count malatesti, i perceive,
 hath got employment?
 delio. no employment, my lord;
 a marginal note in the muster-book, that he is
 a voluntary lord.
 ferdinand. he 's no soldier.
 delio. he has worn gun-powder in 's hollow tooth for the tooth-ache.
 silvio. he comes to the leaguer with a full intent
 to eat fresh beef and garlic, means to stay
 till the scent be gone, and straight return to court.
 delio. he hath read all the late service
 as the city-chronicle relates it;
 and keeps two pewterers going, only to express
 battles in model.
 silvio. then he 'll fight by the book.
 delio. by the almanac, i think,
 to choose good days and shun the critical;
 that 's his mistress' scarf.
 silvio. yes, he protests
 he would do much for that taffeta.
 delio. i think he would run away from a battle,
 to save it from taking prisoner.
 silvio. he is horribly afraid
 gun-powder will spoil the perfume on 't.
 delio. i saw a dutchman break his pate once
 for calling him pot-gun; he made his head
 have a bore in 't like a musket.
 silvio. i would he had made a touch-hole to 't.
 he is indeed a guarded sumpter-cloth,[]
 only for the remove of the court.
 [enter bosola]
 pescara. bosola arriv'd! what should be the business?
 some falling-out amongst the cardinals.
 these factions amongst great men, they are like
 foxes, when their heads are divided,
 they carry fire in their tails, and all the country
 about them goes to wrack for 't.
 silvio. what 's that bosola?
 delio. i knew him in padua,—a fantastical scholar, like such who
 study to know how many knots was in hercules' club, of what colour
 achilles' beard was, or whether hector were not troubled with the
 tooth-ache. he hath studied himself half blear-eyed to know the true
 symmetry of caesar's nose by a shoeing-horn; and this he did to gain
 the name of a speculative man.
 pescara. mark prince ferdinand:
 a very salamander lives in 's eye,
 to mock the eager violence of fire.
 silvio. that cardinal hath made more bad faces with his oppression
 than ever michael angelo made good ones. he lifts up 's nose, like
 a foul porpoise before a storm.
 pescara. the lord ferdinand laughs.
 delio. like a deadly cannon
 that lightens ere it smokes.
 pescara. these are your true pangs of death,
 the pangs of life, that struggle with great statesmen.
 delio. in such a deformed silence witches whisper their charms.
 cardinal. doth she make religion her riding-hood
 to keep her from the sun and tempest?
 ferdinand. that, that damns her. methinks her fault and beauty,
 blended together, show like leprosy,
 the whiter, the fouler. i make it a question
 whether her beggarly brats were ever christ'ned.
 cardinal. i will instantly solicit the state of ancona
 to have them banish'd.
 ferdinand. you are for loretto:
 i shall not be at your ceremony; fare you well.—
 write to the duke of malfi, my young nephew
 she had by her first husband, and acquaint him
 with 's mother's honesty.
 bosola. i will.
 ferdinand. antonio!
 a slave that only smell'd of ink and counters,
 and never in 's life look'd like a gentleman,
 but in the audit-time.—go, go presently,
 draw me out an hundred and fifty of our horse,
 and meet me at the foot-bridge.
 exeunt.
 scene iv
 [enter] two pilgrims to the shrine of our lady of loretto
 first pilgrim. i have not seen a goodlier shrine than this;
 yet i have visited many.
 second pilgrim. the cardinal of arragon
 is this day to resign his cardinal's hat:
 his sister duchess likewise is arriv'd
 to pay her vow of pilgrimage. i expect
 a noble ceremony.
 first pilgrim. no question.—they come.
 [here the ceremony of the cardinal's instalment, in the habit
 of a soldier, perform'd in delivering up his cross, hat, robes,
 and ring, at the shrine, and investing him with sword, helmet,
 shield, and spurs; then antonio, the duchess and their children,
 having presented themselves at the shrine, are, by a form
 of banishment in dumb-show expressed towards them by the
 cardinal and the state of ancona, banished: during all which
 ceremony, this ditty is sung, to very solemn music, by divers
 churchmen: and then exeunt [all except the] two pilgrims.
 arms and honours deck thy story,
 to thy fame's eternal glory!
 adverse fortune ever fly thee;
 no disastrous fate come nigh thee!
 i alone will sing thy praises,
 whom to honour virtue raises,
 and thy study, that divine is,
 bent to martial discipline is,
 lay aside all those robes lie by thee;
 crown thy arts with arms, they 'll beautify thee.
 o worthy of worthiest name, adorn'd in this manner,
 lead bravely thy forces on under war's warlike banner!
 o, mayst thou prove fortunate in all martial courses!
 guide thou still by skill in arts and forces!
 victory attend thee nigh, whilst fame sings loud thy powers;
 triumphant conquest crown thy head, and blessings pour down
 showers![]
 here 's a strange turn of state! who would have thought
 so great a lady would have match'd herself
 unto so mean a person? yet the cardinal
 bears himself much too cruel.
 second pilgrim. they are banish'd.
 first pilgrim. but i would ask what power hath this state
 of ancona to determine of a free prince?
 second pilgrim. they are a free state, sir, and her brother show'd
 how that the pope, fore-hearing of her looseness,
 hath seiz'd into th' protection of the church
 the dukedom which she held as dowager.
 first pilgrim. but by what justice?
 second pilgrim. sure, i think by none,
 only her brother's instigation.
 first pilgrim. what was it with such violence he took
 off from her finger?
 second pilgrim. 'twas her wedding-ring;
 which he vow'd shortly he would sacrifice
 to his revenge.
 first pilgrim. alas, antonio!
 if that a man be thrust into a well,
 no matter who sets hand to 't, his own weight
 will bring him sooner to th' bottom. come, let 's hence.
 fortune makes this conclusion general,
 all things do help th' unhappy man to fall.
 exeunt.
 scene v[]
 [enter] duchess, antonio, children, cariola, and servants
 duchess. banish'd ancona!
 antonio. yes, you see what power
 lightens in great men's breath.
 duchess. is all our train
 shrunk to this poor remainder?
 antonio. these poor men
 which have got little in your service, vow
 to take your fortune: but your wiser buntings,[]
 now they are fledg'd, are gone.
 duchess. they have done wisely.
 this puts me in mind of death: physicians thus,
 with their hands full of money, use to give o'er
 their patients.
 antonio. right the fashion of the world:
 ]from decay'd fortunes every flatterer shrinks;
 men cease to build where the foundation sinks.
 duchess. i had a very strange dream to-night.
 antonio. what was 't?
 duchess. methought i wore my coronet of state,
 and on a sudden all the diamonds
 were chang'd to pearls.
 antonio. my interpretation
 is, you 'll weep shortly; for to me the pearls
 do signify your tears.
 duchess. the birds that live i' th' field
 on the wild benefit of nature live
 happier than we; for they may choose their mates,
 and carol their sweet pleasures to the spring.
 [enter bosola with a letter]
 bosola. you are happily o'erta'en.
 duchess. from my brother?
 bosola. yes, from the lord ferdinand your brother
 all love and safety.
 duchess. thou dost blanch mischief,
 would'st make it white. see, see, like to calm weather
 at sea before a tempest, false hearts speak fair
 to those they intend most mischief.
 [reads.] 'send antonio to me; i want his head in a business.'
 a politic equivocation!
 he doth not want your counsel, but your head;
 that is, he cannot sleep till you be dead.
 and here 's another pitfall that 's strew'd o'er
 with roses; mark it, 'tis a cunning one:
 [reads.]
 'i stand engaged for your husband for several debts at naples:
 let not that trouble him; i had rather have his heart than his
 money':—
 and i believe so too.
 bosola. what do you believe?
 duchess. that he so much distrusts my husband's love,
 he will by no means believe his heart is with him
 until he see it: the devil is not cunning enough
 to circumvent us in riddles.
 bosola. will you reject that noble and free league
 of amity and love which i present you?
 duchess. their league is like that of some politic kings,
 only to make themselves of strength and power
 to be our after-ruin; tell them so.
 bosola. and what from you?
 antonio. thus tell him; i will not come.
 bosola. and what of this?
 antonio. my brothers have dispers'd
 bloodhounds abroad; which till i hear are muzzl'd,
 no truce, though hatch'd with ne'er such politic skill,
 is safe, that hangs upon our enemies' will.
 i 'll not come at them.
 bosola. this proclaims your breeding.
 every small thing draws a base mind to fear,
 as the adamant draws iron. fare you well, sir;
 you shall shortly hear from 's.
 exit.
 duchess. i suspect some ambush;
 therefore by all my love i do conjure you
 to take your eldest son, and fly towards milan.
 let us not venture all this poor remainder
 in one unlucky bottom.
 antonio. you counsel safely.
 best of my life, farewell. since we must part,
 heaven hath a hand in 't; but no otherwise
 than as some curious artist takes in sunder
 a clock or watch, when it is out of frame,
 to bring 't in better order.
 duchess. i know not which is best,
 to see you dead, or part with you.—farewell, boy:
 thou art happy that thou hast not understanding
 to know thy misery; for all our wit
 and reading brings us to a truer sense
 of sorrow.—in the eternal church, sir,
 i do hope we shall not part thus.
 antonio. o, be of comfort!
 make patience a noble fortitude,
 and think not how unkindly we are us'd:
 man, like to cassia, is prov'd best, being bruis'd.
 duchess. must i, like to slave-born russian,
 account it praise to suffer tyranny?
 and yet, o heaven, thy heavy hand is in 't!
 i have seen my little boy oft scourge his top,
 and compar'd myself to 't: naught made me e'er
 go right but heaven's scourge-stick.
 antonio. do not weep:
 heaven fashion'd us of nothing; and we strive
 to bring ourselves to nothing.—farewell, cariola,
 and thy sweet armful.—if i do never see thee more,
 be a good mother to your little ones,
 and save them from the tiger: fare you well.
 duchess. let me look upon you once more, for that speech
 came from a dying father. your kiss is colder
 than that i have seen an holy anchorite
 give to a dead man's skull.
 antonio. my heart is turn'd to a heavy lump of lead,
 with which i sound my danger: fare you well.
 exeunt [antonio and his son.]
 duchess. my laurel is all withered.
 cariola. look, madam, what a troop of armed men
 make toward us!
 re-enter bosola [visarded,] with a guard
 duchess. o, they are very welcome:
 when fortune's wheel is over-charg'd with princes,
 the weight makes it move swift: i would have my ruin
 be sudden.—i am your adventure, am i not?
 bosola. you are: you must see your husband no more.
 duchess. what devil art thou that counterfeit'st heaven's thunder?
 bosola. is that terrible? i would have you tell me whether
 is that note worse that frights the silly birds
 out of the corn, or that which doth allure them
 to the nets? you have heark'ned to the last too much.
 duchess. o misery! like to a rusty o'ercharg'd cannon,
 shall i never fly in pieces?—come, to what prison?
 bosola. to none.
 duchess. whither, then?
 bosola. to your palace.
 duchess. i have heard
 that charon's boat serves to convey all o'er
 the dismal lake, but brings none back again.
 bosola. your brothers mean you safety and pity.
 duchess. pity!
 with such a pity men preserve alive
 pheasants and quails, when they are not fat enough
 to be eaten.
 bosola. these are your children?
 duchess. yes.
 bosola. can they prattle?
 duchess. no:
 but i intend, since they were born accurs'd,
 curses shall be their first language.
 bosola. fie, madam!
 forget this base, low fellow——
 duchess. were i a man,
 i 'd beat that counterfeit face[] into thy other.
 bosola. one of no birth.
 duchess. say that he was born mean,
 man is most happy when 's own actions
 be arguments and examples of his virtue.
 bosola. a barren, beggarly virtue.
 duchess. i prithee, who is greatest? can you tell?
 sad tales befit my woe: i 'll tell you one.
 a salmon, as she swam unto the sea.
 met with a dog-fish, who encounters her
 with this rough language; 'why art thou so bold
 to mix thyself with our high state of floods,
 being no eminent courtier, but one
 that for the calmest and fresh time o' th' year
 dost live in shallow rivers, rank'st thyself
 with silly smelts and shrimps? and darest thou
 pass by our dog-ship without reverence?'
 'o,' quoth the salmon, 'sister, be at peace:
 thank jupiter we both have pass'd the net!
 our value never can be truly known,
 till in the fisher's basket we be shown:
 i' th' market then my price may be the higher,
 even when i am nearest to the cook and fire.'
 so to great men the moral may be stretched;
 men oft are valu'd high, when they're most wretched.—
 but come, whither you please. i am arm'd 'gainst misery;
 bent to all sways of the oppressor's will:
 there 's no deep valley but near some great hill.
 exeunt.
 act iv
 scene i[]
 [enter] ferdinand and bosola
 ferdinand. how doth our sister duchess bear herself
 in her imprisonment?
 bosola. nobly: i 'll describe her.
 she 's sad as one long us'd to 't, and she seems
 rather to welcome the end of misery
 than shun it; a behaviour so noble
 as gives a majesty to adversity:
 you may discern the shape of loveliness
 more perfect in her tears than in her smiles:
 she will muse for hours together; and her silence,
 methinks, expresseth more than if she spake.
 ferdinand. her melancholy seems to be fortified
 with a strange disdain.
 bosola. 'tis so; and this restraint,
 like english mastives that grow fierce with tying,
 makes her too passionately apprehend
 those pleasures she is kept from.
 ferdinand. curse upon her!
 i will no longer study in the book
 of another's heart. inform her what i told you.
 exit.
 [enter duchess and attendants]
 bosola. all comfort to your grace!
 duchess. i will have none.
 pray thee, why dost thou wrap thy poison'd pills
 in gold and sugar?
 bosola. your elder brother, the lord ferdinand,
 is come to visit you, and sends you word,
 'cause once he rashly made a solemn vow
 never to see you more, he comes i' th' night;
 and prays you gently neither torch nor taper
 shine in your chamber. he will kiss your hand,
 and reconcile himself; but for his vow
 he dares not see you.
 duchess. at his pleasure.—
 take hence the lights.—he 's come.
 [exeunt attendants with lights.]
 [enter ferdinand]
 ferdinand. where are you?
 duchess. here, sir.
 ferdinand. this darkness suits you well.
 duchess. i would ask you pardon.
 ferdinand. you have it;
 for i account it the honorabl'st revenge,
 where i may kill, to pardon.—where are your cubs?
 duchess. whom?
 ferdinand. call them your children;
 for though our national law distinguish bastards
 ]from true legitimate issue, compassionate nature
 makes them all equal.
 duchess. do you visit me for this?
 you violate a sacrament o' th' church
 shall make you howl in hell for 't.
 ferdinand. it had been well,
 could you have liv'd thus always; for, indeed,
 you were too much i' th' light:—but no more;
 i come to seal my peace with you. here 's a hand
 gives her a dead man's hand.
 to which you have vow'd much love; the ring upon 't
 you gave.
 duchess. i affectionately kiss it.
 ferdinand. pray, do, and bury the print of it in your heart.
 i will leave this ring with you for a love-token;
 and the hand as sure as the ring; and do not doubt
 but you shall have the heart too. when you need a friend,
 send it to him that ow'd it; you shall see
 whether he can aid you.
 duchess. you are very cold:
 i fear you are not well after your travel.—
 ha! lights!——o, horrible!
 ferdinand. let her have lights enough.
 exit.
 duchess. what witchcraft doth he practise, that he hath left
 a dead man's hand here?
 [here is discovered, behind a traverse,[] the artificial
 figures of antonio and his children, appearing as if
 they were dead.
 bosola. look you, here 's the piece from which 'twas ta'en.
 he doth present you this sad spectacle,
 that, now you know directly they are dead,
 hereafter you may wisely cease to grieve
 for that which cannot be recovered.
 duchess. there is not between heaven and earth one wish
 i stay for after this. it wastes me more
 than were 't my picture, fashion'd out of wax,
 stuck with a magical needle, and then buried
 in some foul dunghill; and yon 's an excellent property
 for a tyrant, which i would account mercy.
 bosola. what 's that?
 duchess. if they would bind me to that lifeless trunk,
 and let me freeze to death.
 bosola. come, you must live.
 duchess. that 's the greatest torture souls feel in hell,
 in hell, that they must live, and cannot die.
 portia,[] i 'll new kindle thy coals again,
 and revive the rare and almost dead example
 of a loving wife.
 bosola. o, fie! despair? remember
 you are a christian.
 duchess. the church enjoins fasting:
 i 'll starve myself to death.
 bosola. leave this vain sorrow.
 things being at the worst begin to mend: the bee
 when he hath shot his sting into your hand,
 may then play with your eye-lid.
 duchess. good comfortable fellow,
 persuade a wretch that 's broke upon the wheel
 to have all his bones new set; entreat him live
 to be executed again. who must despatch me?
 i account this world a tedious theatre,
 for i do play a part in 't 'gainst my will.
 bosola. come, be of comfort; i will save your life.
 duchess. indeed, i have not leisure to tend so small a business.
 bosola. now, by my life, i pity you.
 duchess. thou art a fool, then,
 to waste thy pity on a thing so wretched
 as cannot pity itself. i am full of daggers.
 puff, let me blow these vipers from me.
 [enter servant]
 what are you?
 servant. one that wishes you long life.
 duchess. i would thou wert hang'd for the horrible curse
 thou hast given me: i shall shortly grow one
 of the miracles of pity. i 'll go pray;—
 [exit servant.]
 no, i 'll go curse.
 bosola. o, fie!
 duchess. i could curse the stars.
 bosola. o, fearful!
 duchess. and those three smiling seasons of the year
 into a russian winter; nay, the world
 to its first chaos.
 bosola. look you, the stars shine still[.]
 duchess. o, but you must
 remember, my curse hath a great way to go.—
 plagues, that make lanes through largest families,
 consume them!—
 bosola. fie, lady!
 duchess. let them, like tyrants,
 never be remembered but for the ill they have done;
 let all the zealous prayers of mortified
 churchmen forget them!—
 bosola. o, uncharitable!
 duchess. let heaven a little while cease crowning martyrs,
 to punish them!—
 go, howl them this, and say, i long to bleed:
 it is some mercy when men kill with speed.
 exit.
 [re-enter ferdinand]
 ferdinand. excellent, as i would wish; she 's plagu'd in art.[]
 these presentations are but fram'd in wax
 by the curious master in that quality,[]
 vincentio lauriola, and she takes them
 for true substantial bodies.
 bosola. why do you do this?
 ferdinand. to bring her to despair.
 bosola. faith, end here,
 and go no farther in your cruelty:
 send her a penitential garment to put on
 next to her delicate skin, and furnish her
 with beads and prayer-books.
 ferdinand. damn her! that body of hers.
 while that my blood run pure in 't, was more worth
 than that which thou wouldst comfort, call'd a soul.
 i will send her masques of common courtezans,
 have her meat serv'd up by bawds and ruffians,
 and, 'cause she 'll needs be mad, i am resolv'd
 to move forth the common hospital
 all the mad-folk, and place them near her lodging;
 there let them practise together, sing and dance,
 and act their gambols to the full o' th' moon:
 if she can sleep the better for it, let her.
 your work is almost ended.
 bosola. must i see her again?
 ferdinand. yes.
 bosola. never.
 ferdinand. you must.
 bosola. never in mine own shape;
 that 's forfeited by my intelligence[]
 and this last cruel lie: when you send me next,
 the business shall be comfort.
 ferdinand. very likely;
 thy pity is nothing of kin to thee, antonio
 lurks about milan: thou shalt shortly thither,
 to feed a fire as great as my revenge,
 which nev'r will slack till it hath spent his fuel:
 intemperate agues make physicians cruel.
 exeunt.
 scene ii[]
 [enter] duchess and cariola
 duchess. what hideous noise was that?
 cariola. 'tis the wild consort[]
 of madmen, lady, which your tyrant brother
 hath plac'd about your lodging. this tyranny,
 i think, was never practis'd till this hour.
 duchess. indeed, i thank him. nothing but noise and folly
 can keep me in my right wits; whereas reason
 and silence make me stark mad. sit down;
 discourse to me some dismal tragedy.
 cariola. o, 'twill increase your melancholy!
 duchess. thou art deceiv'd:
 to hear of greater grief would lessen mine.
 this is a prison?
 cariola. yes, but you shall live
 to shake this durance off.
 duchess. thou art a fool:
 the robin-red-breast and the nightingale
 never live long in cages.
 cariola. pray, dry your eyes.
 what think you of, madam?
 duchess. of nothing;
 when i muse thus, i sleep.
 cariola. like a madman, with your eyes open?
 duchess. dost thou think we shall know one another
 in th' other world?
 cariola. yes, out of question.
 duchess. o, that it were possible we might
 but hold some two days' conference with the dead!
 ]from them i should learn somewhat, i am sure,
 i never shall know here. i 'll tell thee a miracle:
 i am not mad yet, to my cause of sorrow:
 th' heaven o'er my head seems made of molten brass,
 the earth of flaming sulphur, yet i am not mad.
 i am acquainted with sad misery
 as the tann'd galley-slave is with his oar;
 necessity makes me suffer constantly,
 and custom makes it easy. who do i look like now?
 cariola. like to your picture in the gallery,
 a deal of life in show, but none in practice;
 or rather like some reverend monument
 whose ruins are even pitied.
 duchess. very proper;
 and fortune seems only to have her eye-sight
 to behold my tragedy.—how now!
 what noise is that?
 [enter servant]
 servant. i am come to tell you
 your brother hath intended you some sport.
 a great physician, when the pope was sick
 of a deep melancholy, presented him
 with several sorts[] of madmen, which wild object
 being full of change and sport, forc'd him to laugh,
 and so the imposthume[] broke: the self-same cure
 the duke intends on you.
 duchess. let them come in.
 servant. there 's a mad lawyer; and a secular priest;
 a doctor that hath forfeited his wits
 by jealousy; an astrologian
 that in his works said such a day o' the month
 should be the day of doom, and, failing of 't,
 ran mad; an english tailor craz'd i' the brain
 with the study of new fashions; a gentleman-usher
 quite beside himself with care to keep in mind
 the number of his lady's salutations
 or 'how do you,' she employ'd him in each morning;
 a farmer, too, an excellent knave in grain,[]
 mad 'cause he was hind'red transportation:[]
 and let one broker that 's mad loose to these,
 you'd think the devil were among them.
 duchess. sit, cariola.—let them loose when you please,
 for i am chain'd to endure all your tyranny.
 [enter madman]
 here by a madman this song is sung to a dismal kind of music
 o, let us howl some heavy note,
 some deadly dogged howl,
 sounding as from the threatening throat
 of beasts and fatal fowl!
 as ravens, screech-owls, bulls, and bears,
 we 'll bell, and bawl our parts,
 till irksome noise have cloy'd your ears
 and corrosiv'd your hearts.
 at last, whenas our choir wants breath,
 our bodies being blest,
 we 'll sing, like swans, to welcome death,
 and die in love and rest.
 first madman. doom's-day not come yet! i 'll draw it nearer by
 a perspective,[] or make a glass that shall set all the world
 on fire upon an instant. i cannot sleep; my pillow is stuffed
 with a litter of porcupines.
 second madman. hell is a mere glass-house, where the devils
 are continually blowing up women's souls on hollow irons,
 and the fire never goes out.
 first madman. i have skill in heraldry.
 second madman. hast?
 first madman. you do give for your crest a woodcock's head
 with the brains picked out on 't; you are a very ancient gentleman.
 third madman. greek is turned turk: we are only to be saved by
 the helvetian translation.[]
 first madman. come on, sir, i will lay the law to you.
 second madman. o, rather lay a corrosive: the law will eat
 to the bone.
 third madman. he that drinks but to satisfy nature is damn'd.
 fourth madman. if i had my glass here, i would show a sight should
 make all the women here call me mad doctor.
 first madman. what 's he? a rope-maker?
 second madman. no, no, no, a snuffling knave that, while he shows
 the tombs, will have his hand in a wench's placket.[]
 third madman. woe to the caroche[] that brought home my wife
 from the masque at three o'clock in the morning! it had a large
 feather-bed in it.
 fourth madman. i have pared the devil's nails forty times, roasted
 them in raven's eggs, and cured agues with them.
 third madman. get me three hundred milch-bats, to make possets[]
 to procure sleep.
 fourth madman. all the college may throw their caps at me:
 i have made a soap-boiler costive; it was my masterpiece.
 here the dance, consisting of eight madmen, with music
 answerable thereunto; after which, bosola, like an old man,
 enters.
 duchess. is he mad too?
 servant. pray, question him. i 'll leave you.
 [exeunt servant and madmen.]
 bosola. i am come to make thy tomb.
 duchess. ha! my tomb!
 thou speak'st as if i lay upon my death-bed,
 gasping for breath. dost thou perceive me sick?
 yes, and the more dangerously, since thy sickness is insensible.
 duchess. thou art not mad, sure: dost know me?
 bosola. yes.
 duchess. who am i?
 bosola. thou art a box of worm-seed, at best but a salvatory[]
 of green mummy.[] what 's this flesh? a little crudded[] milk,
 fantastical puff-paste. our bodies are weaker than those paper-
 prisons boys use to keep flies in; more contemptible, since ours
 is to preserve earth-worms. didst thou ever see a lark in a cage?
 such is the soul in the body: this world is like her little turf
 of grass, and the heaven o'er our heads like her looking-glass, only
 gives us a miserable knowledge of the small compass of our prison.
 duchess. am not i thy duchess?
 bosola. thou art some great woman, sure, for riot begins to sit
 on thy forehead (clad in gray hairs) twenty years sooner than on
 a merry milk-maid's. thou sleepest worse than if a mouse should be
 forced to take up her lodging in a cat's ear: a little infant that
 breeds its teeth, should it lie with thee, would cry out, as if thou
 wert the more unquiet bedfellow.
 duchess. i am duchess of malfi still.
 bosola. that makes thy sleep so broken:
 glories, like glow-worms, afar off shine bright,
 but, look'd to near, have neither heat nor light.
 duchess. thou art very plain.
 bosola. my trade is to flatter the dead, not the living;
 i am a tomb-maker.
 duchess. and thou comest to make my tomb?
 bosola. yes.
 duchess. let me be a little merry:—of what stuff wilt thou make it?
 bosola. nay, resolve me first, of what fashion?
 duchess. why, do we grow fantastical on our deathbed?
 do we affect fashion in the grave?
 bosola. most ambitiously. princes' images on their tombs do not
 lie, as they were wont, seeming to pray up to heaven; but with their
 hands under their cheeks, as if they died of the tooth-ache. they
 are not carved with their eyes fix'd upon the stars, but as their
 minds were wholly bent upon the world, the selfsame way they seem
 to turn their faces.
 duchess. let me know fully therefore the effect
 of this thy dismal preparation,
 this talk fit for a charnel.
 bosola. now i shall:—
 [enter executioners, with] a coffin, cords, and a bell
 here is a present from your princely brothers;
 and may it arrive welcome, for it brings
 last benefit, last sorrow.
 duchess. let me see it:
 i have so much obedience in my blood,
 i wish it in their veins to do them good.
 bosola. this is your last presence-chamber.
 cariola. o my sweet lady!
 duchess. peace; it affrights not me.
 bosola. i am the common bellman
 that usually is sent to condemn'd persons
 the night before they suffer.
 duchess. even now thou said'st
 thou wast a tomb-maker.
 bosola. 'twas to bring you
 by degrees to mortification. listen.
 hark, now everything is still,
 the screech-owl and the whistler shrill
 call upon our dame aloud,
 and bid her quickly don her shroud!
 much you had of land and rent;
 your length in clay 's now competent:
 a long war disturb'd your mind;
 here your perfect peace is sign'd.
 of what is 't fools make such vain keeping?
 sin their conception, their birth weeping,
 their life a general mist of error,
 their death a hideous storm of terror.
 strew your hair with powders sweet,
 don clean linen, bathe your feet,
 and (the foul fiend more to check)
 a crucifix let bless your neck.
 'tis now full tide 'tween night and day;
 end your groan, and come away.
 cariola. hence, villains, tyrants, murderers! alas!
 what will you do with my lady?—call for help!
 duchess. to whom? to our next neighbours? they are mad-folks.
 bosola. remove that noise.
 duchess. farewell, cariola.
 in my last will i have not much to give:
 a many hungry guests have fed upon me;
 thine will be a poor reversion.
 cariola. i will die with her.
 duchess. i pray thee, look thou giv'st my little boy
 some syrup for his cold, and let the girl
 say her prayers ere she sleep.
 [cariola is forced out by the executioners.]
 now what you please:
 what death?
 bosola. strangling; here are your executioners.
 duchess. i forgive them:
 the apoplexy, catarrh, or cough o' th' lungs,
 would do as much as they do.
 bosola. doth not death fright you?
 duchess. who would be afraid on 't,
 knowing to meet such excellent company
 in th' other world?
 bosola. yet, methinks,
 the manner of your death should much afflict you:
 this cord should terrify you.
 duchess. not a whit:
 what would it pleasure me to have my throat cut
 with diamonds? or to be smothered
 with cassia? or to be shot to death with pearls?
 i know death hath ten thousand several doors
 for men to take their exits; and 'tis found
 they go on such strange geometrical hinges,
 you may open them both ways: any way, for heaven-sake,
 so i were out of your whispering. tell my brothers
 that i perceive death, now i am well awake,
 best gift is they can give or i can take.
 i would fain put off my last woman's-fault,
 i 'd not be tedious to you.
 first executioner. we are ready.
 duchess. dispose my breath how please you; but my body
 bestow upon my women, will you?
 first executioner. yes.
 duchess. pull, and pull strongly, for your able strength
 must pull down heaven upon me:—
 yet stay; heaven-gates are not so highly arch'd
 as princes' palaces; they that enter there
 must go upon their knees [kneels].—come, violent death,
 serve for mandragora to make me sleep!—
 go tell my brothers, when i am laid out,
 they then may feed in quiet.
 they strangle her.
 bosola. where 's the waiting-woman??
 fetch her: some other strangle the children.
 [enter cariola]
 look you, there sleeps your mistress.
 cariola. o, you are damn'd
 perpetually for this! my turn is next;
 is 't not so ordered?
 bosola. yes, and i am glad
 you are so well prepar'd for 't.
 cariola. you are deceiv'd, sir,
 i am not prepar'd for 't, i will not die;
 i will first come to my answer,[] and know
 how i have offended.
 bosola. come, despatch her.—
 you kept her counsel; now you shall keep ours.
 cariola. i will not die, i must not; i am contracted
 to a young gentleman.
 first executioner. here 's your wedding-ring.
 cariola. let me but speak with the duke. i 'll discover
 treason to his person.
 bosola. delays:—throttle her.
 first executioner. she bites and scratches.
 cariola. if you kill me now,
 i am damn'd; i have not been at confession
 this two years.
 bosola. [to executioners.] when?[]
 cariola. i am quick with child.
 bosola. why, then,
 your credit 's saved.
 [executioners strangle cariola.]
 bear her into the next room;
 let these lie still.
 [exeunt the executioners with the body of cariola.]
 [enter ferdinand]
 ferdinand. is she dead?
 bosola. she is what
 you 'd have her. but here begin your pity:
 shows the children strangled.
 alas, how have these offended?
 ferdinand. the death
 of young wolves is never to be pitied.
 bosola. fix your eye here.
 ferdinand. constantly.
 bosola. do you not weep?
 other sins only speak; murder shrieks out.
 the element of water moistens the earth,
 but blood flies upwards and bedews the heavens.
 ferdinand. cover her face; mine eyes dazzle: she died young.
 bosola. i think not so; her infelicity
 seem'd to have years too many.
 ferdinand. she and i were twins;
 and should i die this instant, i had liv'd
 her time to a minute.
 bosola. it seems she was born first:
 you have bloodily approv'd the ancient truth,
 that kindred commonly do worse agree
 than remote strangers.
 ferdinand. let me see her face
 again. why didst thou not pity her? what
 an excellent honest man mightst thou have been,
 if thou hadst borne her to some sanctuary!
 or, bold in a good cause, oppos'd thyself,
 with thy advanced sword above thy head,
 between her innocence and my revenge!
 i bade thee, when i was distracted of my wits,
 go kill my dearest friend, and thou hast done 't.
 for let me but examine well the cause:
 what was the meanness of her match to me?
 only i must confess i had a hope,
 had she continu'd widow, to have gain'd
 an infinite mass of treasure by her death:
 and that was the main cause,—her marriage,
 that drew a stream of gall quite through my heart.
 for thee, as we observe in tragedies
 that a good actor many times is curs'd
 for playing a villain's part, i hate thee for 't,
 and, for my sake, say, thou hast done much ill well.
 bosola. let me quicken your memory, for i perceive
 you are falling into ingratitude: i challenge
 the reward due to my service.
 ferdinand. i 'll tell thee
 what i 'll give thee.
 bosola. do.
 ferdinand. i 'll give thee a pardon
 for this murder.
 bosola. ha!
 ferdinand. yes, and 'tis
 the largest bounty i can study to do thee.
 by what authority didst thou execute
 this bloody sentence?
 bosola. by yours.
 ferdinand. mine! was i her judge?
 did any ceremonial form of law
 doom her to not-being? did a complete jury
 deliver her conviction up i' the court?
 where shalt thou find this judgment register'd,
 unless in hell? see, like a bloody fool,
 thou 'st forfeited thy life, and thou shalt die for 't.
 bosola. the office of justice is perverted quite
 when one thief hangs another. who shall dare
 to reveal this?
 ferdinand. o, i 'll tell thee;
 the wolf shall find her grave, and scrape it up,
 not to devour the corpse, but to discover
 the horrid murder.
 bosola. you, not i, shall quake for 't.
 ferdinand. leave me.
 bosola. i will first receive my pension.
 ferdinand. you are a villain.
 bosola. when your ingratitude
 is judge, i am so.
 ferdinand. o horror,
 that not the fear of him which binds the devils
 can prescribe man obedience!—
 never look upon me more.
 bosola. why, fare thee well.
 your brother and yourself are worthy men!
 you have a pair of hearts are hollow graves,
 rotten, and rotting others; and your vengeance,
 like two chain'd-bullets, still goes arm in arm:
 you may be brothers; for treason, like the plague,
 doth take much in a blood. i stand like one
 that long hath ta'en a sweet and golden dream:
 i am angry with myself, now that i wake.
 ferdinand. get thee into some unknown part o' the world,
 that i may never see thee.
 bosola. let me know
 wherefore i should be thus neglected. sir,
 i serv'd your tyranny, and rather strove
 to satisfy yourself than all the world:
 and though i loath'd the evil, yet i lov'd
 you that did counsel it; and rather sought
 to appear a true servant than an honest man.
 ferdinand. i 'll go hunt the badger by owl-light:
 'tis a deed of darkness.
 exit.
 bosola. he 's much distracted. off, my painted honour!
 while with vain hopes our faculties we tire,
 we seem to sweat in ice and freeze in fire.
 what would i do, were this to do again?
 i would not change my peace of conscience
 for all the wealth of europe.—she stirs; here 's life:—
 return, fair soul, from darkness, and lead mine
 out of this sensible hell:—she 's warm, she breathes:—
 upon thy pale lips i will melt my heart,
 to store them with fresh colour.—who 's there?
 some cordial drink!—alas! i dare not call:
 so pity would destroy pity.—her eye opes,
 and heaven in it seems to ope, that late was shut,
 to take me up to mercy.
 duchess. antonio!
 bosola. yes, madam, he is living;
 the dead bodies you saw were but feign'd statues.
 he 's reconcil'd to your brothers; the pope hath wrought
 the atonement.
 duchess. mercy!
 dies.
 bosola. o, she 's gone again! there the cords of life broke.
 o sacred innocence, that sweetly sleeps
 on turtles' feathers, whilst a guilty conscience
 is a black register wherein is writ
 all our good deeds and bad, a perspective
 that shows us hell! that we cannot be suffer'd
 to do good when we have a mind to it!
 this is manly sorrow;
 these tears, i am very certain, never grew
 in my mother's milk. my estate is sunk
 below the degree of fear: where were
 these penitent fountains while she was living?
 o, they were frozen up! here is a sight
 as direful to my soul as is the sword
 unto a wretch hath slain his father.
 come, i 'll bear thee hence,
 and execute thy last will; that 's deliver
 thy body to the reverend dispose
 of some good women: that the cruel tyrant
 shall not deny me. then i 'll post to milan,
 where somewhat i will speedily enact
 worth my dejection.
 exit [with the body].
 act v
 scene i[]
 [enter] antonio and delio
 antonio. what think you of my hope of reconcilement
 to the arragonian brethren?
 delio. i misdoubt it;
 for though they have sent their letters of safe-conduct
 for your repair to milan, they appear
 but nets to entrap you. the marquis of pescara,
 under whom you hold certain land in cheat,[]
 much 'gainst his noble nature hath been mov'd
 to seize those lands; and some of his dependants
 are at this instant making it their suit
 to be invested in your revenues.
 i cannot think they mean well to your life
 that do deprive you of your means of life,
 your living.
 antonio. you are still an heretic[]
 to any safety i can shape myself.
 delio. here comes the marquis: i will make myself
 petitioner for some part of your land,
 to know whither it is flying.
 antonio. i pray, do.
 [withdraws.]
 [enter pescara]
 delio. sir, i have a suit to you.
 pescara. to me?
 delio. an easy one:
 there is the citadel of saint bennet,
 with some demesnes, of late in the possession
 of antonio bologna,—please you bestow them on me.
 pescara. you are my friend; but this is such a suit,
 nor fit for me to give, nor you to take.
 delio. no, sir?
 pescara. i will give you ample reason for 't
 soon in private:—here 's the cardinal's mistress.
 [enter julia]
 julia. my lord, i am grown your poor petitioner,
 and should be an ill beggar, had i not
 a great man's letter here, the cardinal's,
 to court you in my favour.
 [gives a letter.]
 pescara. he entreats for you
 the citadel of saint bennet, that belong'd
 to the banish'd bologna.
 julia. yes.
 pescara. i could not have thought of a friend i could rather
 pleasure with it: 'tis yours.
 julia. sir, i thank you;
 and he shall know how doubly i am engag'd
 both in your gift, and speediness of giving
 which makes your grant the greater.
 exit.
 antonio. how they fortify
 themselves with my ruin!
 delio. sir, i am
 little bound to you.
 pescara. why?
 delio. because you deni'd this suit to me, and gave 't
 to such a creature.
 pescara. do you know what it was?
 it was antonio's land; not forfeited
 by course of law, but ravish'd from his throat
 by the cardinal's entreaty. it were not fit
 i should bestow so main a piece of wrong
 upon my friend; 'tis a gratification
 only due to a strumpet, for it is injustice.
 shall i sprinkle the pure blood of innocents
 to make those followers i call my friends
 look ruddier upon me? i am glad
 this land, ta'en from the owner by such wrong,
 returns again unto so foul an use
 as salary for his lust. learn, good delio,
 to ask noble things of me, and you shall find
 i 'll be a noble giver.
 delio. you instruct me well.
 antonio. why, here 's a man now would fright impudence
 ]from sauciest beggars.
 pescara. prince ferdinand 's come to milan,
 sick, as they give out, of an apoplexy;
 but some say 'tis a frenzy: i am going
 to visit him.
 exit.
 antonio. 'tis a noble old fellow.
 delio. what course do you mean to take, antonio?
 antonio. this night i mean to venture all my fortune,
 which is no more than a poor ling'ring life,
 to the cardinal's worst of malice. i have got
 private access to his chamber; and intend
 to visit him about the mid of night,
 as once his brother did our noble duchess.
 it may be that the sudden apprehension
 of danger,—for i 'll go in mine own shape,—
 when he shall see it fraight[] with love and duty,
 may draw the poison out of him, and work
 a friendly reconcilement. if it fail,
 yet it shall rid me of this infamous calling;
 for better fall once than be ever falling.
 delio. i 'll second you in all danger; and howe'er,
 my life keeps rank with yours.
 antonio. you are still my lov'd and best friend.
 exeunt.
 scene ii[]
 [enter] pescara and doctor
 pescara. now, doctor, may i visit your patient?
 doctor. if 't please your lordship; but he 's instantly
 to take the air here in the gallery
 by my direction.
 pescara. pray thee, what 's his disease?
 doctor. a very pestilent disease, my lord,
 they call lycanthropia.
 pescara. what 's that?
 i need a dictionary to 't.
 doctor. i 'll tell you.
 in those that are possess'd with 't there o'erflows
 such melancholy humour they imagine
 themselves to be transformed into wolves;
 steal forth to church-yards in the dead of night,
 and dig dead bodies up: as two nights since
 one met the duke 'bout midnight in a lane
 behind saint mark's church, with the leg of a man
 upon his shoulder; and he howl'd fearfully;
 said he was a wolf, only the difference
 was, a wolf's skin was hairy on the outside,
 his on the inside; bade them take their swords,
 rip up his flesh, and try. straight i was sent for,
 and, having minister'd to him, found his grace
 very well recover'd.
 pescara. i am glad on 't.
 doctor. yet not without some fear
 of a relapse. if he grow to his fit again,
 i 'll go a nearer way to work with him
 than ever paracelsus dream'd of; if
 they 'll give me leave, i 'll buffet his madness out of him.
 stand aside; he comes.
 [enter ferdinand, cardinal, malatesti, and bosola]
 ferdinand. leave me.
 malatesti. why doth your lordship love this solitariness?
 ferdinand. eagles commonly fly alone: they are crows, daws,
 and starlings that flock together. look, what 's that follows me?
 malatesti. nothing, my lord.
 ferdinand. yes.
 malatesti. 'tis your shadow.
 ferdinand. stay it; let it not haunt me.
 malatesti. impossible, if you move, and the sun shine.
 ferdinand. i will throttle it.
 [throws himself down on his shadow.]
 malatesti. o, my lord, you are angry with nothing.
 ferdinand. you are a fool: how is 't possible i should catch
 my shadow, unless i fall upon 't? when i go to hell, i mean
 to carry a bribe; for, look you, good gifts evermore make way
 for the worst persons.
 pescara. rise, good my lord.
 ferdinand. i am studying the art of patience.
 pescara. 'tis a noble virtue.
 ferdinand. to drive six snails before me from this town to moscow;
 neither use goad nor whip to them, but let them take their own time;
 —the patient'st man i' th' world match me for an experiment:—
 an i 'll crawl after like a sheep-biter.[]
 cardinal. force him up.
 [they raise him.]
 ferdinand. use me well, you were best. what i have done, i have
 done: i 'll confess nothing.
 doctor. now let me come to him.—are you mad, my lord? are you out
 of your princely wits?
 ferdinand. what 's he?
 pescara. your doctor.
 ferdinand. let me have his beard saw'd off, and his eye-brows
 fil'd more civil.
 doctor. i must do mad tricks with him, for that 's the only way
 on 't.—i have brought your grace a salamander's skin to keep
 you from sun-burning.
 ferdinand. i have cruel sore eyes.
 doctor. the white of a cockatrix's[] egg is present remedy.
 ferdinand. let it be a new-laid one, you were best.
 hide me from him: physicians are like kings,—
 they brook no contradiction.
 doctor. now he begins to fear me: now let me alone with him.
 cardinal. how now! put off your gown!
 doctor. let me have some forty urinals filled with rosewater:
 he and i 'll go pelt one another with them.—now he begins to fear
 me.—can you fetch a frisk,[] sir?—let him go, let him go, upon
 my peril: i find by his eye he stands in awe of me; i 'll make him
 as tame as a dormouse.
 ferdinand. can you fetch your frisks, sir!—i will stamp him into
 a cullis,[] flay off his skin to cover one of the anatomies[]
 this rogue hath set i' th' cold yonder in barber-chirurgeon's-hall.
 —hence, hence! you are all of you like beasts for sacrifice.
 [throws the doctor down and beats him.]
 there 's nothing left of you but tongue and belly, flattery and
 lechery.
 [exit.]
 pescara. doctor, he did not fear you thoroughly.
 doctor. true; i was somewhat too forward.
 bosola. mercy upon me, what a fatal judgment
 hath fall'n upon this ferdinand!
 pescara. knows your grace
 what accident hath brought unto the prince
 this strange distraction?
 cardinal. [aside.] i must feign somewhat.—thus they say it grew.
 you have heard it rumour'd, for these many years
 none of our family dies but there is seen
 the shape of an old woman, which is given
 by tradition to us to have been murder'd
 by her nephews for her riches. such a figure
 one night, as the prince sat up late at 's book,
 appear'd to him; when crying out for help,
 the gentleman of 's chamber found his grace
 all on a cold sweat, alter'd much in face
 and language: since which apparition,
 he hath grown worse and worse, and i much fear
 he cannot live.
 bosola. sir, i would speak with you.
 pescara. we 'll leave your grace,
 wishing to the sick prince, our noble lord,
 all health of mind and body.
 cardinal. you are most welcome.
 [exeunt pescara, malatesti, and doctor.]
 are you come? so.—[aside.] this fellow must not know
 by any means i had intelligence
 in our duchess' death; for, though i counsell'd it,
 the full of all th' engagement seem'd to grow
 ]from ferdinand.—now, sir, how fares our sister?
 i do not think but sorrow makes her look
 like to an oft-dy'd garment: she shall now
 take comfort from me. why do you look so wildly?
 o, the fortune of your master here the prince
 dejects you; but be you of happy comfort:
 if you 'll do one thing for me i 'll entreat,
 though he had a cold tomb-stone o'er his bones,
 i 'd make you what you would be.
 bosola. any thing;
 give it me in a breath, and let me fly to 't.
 they that think long small expedition win,
 for musing much o' th' end cannot begin.
 [enter julia]
 julia. sir, will you come into supper?
 cardinal. i am busy; leave me[.]
 julia [aside.] what an excellent shape hath that fellow!
 exit.
 cardinal. 'tis thus. antonio lurks here in milan:
 inquire him out, and kill him. while he lives,
 our sister cannot marry; and i have thought
 of an excellent match for her. do this, and style me
 thy advancement.
 bosola. but by what means shall i find him out?
 cardinal. there is a gentleman call'd delio
 here in the camp, that hath been long approv'd
 his loyal friend. set eye upon that fellow;
 follow him to mass; may be antonio,
 although he do account religion
 but a school-name, for fashion of the world
 may accompany him; or else go inquire out
 delio's confessor, and see if you can bribe
 him to reveal it. there are a thousand ways
 a man might find to trace him; as to know
 what fellows haunt the jews for taking up
 great sums of money, for sure he 's in want;
 or else to go to the picture-makers, and learn
 who bought[] her picture lately: some of these
 happily may take.
 bosola. well, i 'll not freeze i' th' business:
 i would see that wretched thing, antonio,
 above all sights i' th' world.
 cardinal. do, and be happy.
 exit.
 bosola. this fellow doth breed basilisks in 's eyes,
 he 's nothing else but murder; yet he seems
 not to have notice of the duchess' death.
 'tis his cunning: i must follow his example;
 there cannot be a surer way to trace
 than that of an old fox.
 [re-enter julia, with a pistol]
 julia. so, sir, you are well met.
 bosola. how now!
 julia. nay, the doors are fast enough:
 now, sir, i will make you confess your treachery.
 bosola. treachery!
 julia. yes, confess to me
 which of my women 'twas you hir'd to put
 love-powder into my drink?
 bosola. love-powder!
 julia. yes, when i was at malfi.
 why should i fall in love with such a face else?
 i have already suffer'd for thee so much pain,
 the only remedy to do me good
 is to kill my longing.
 bosola. sure, your pistol holds
 nothing but perfumes or kissing-comfits.[]
 excellent lady!
 you have a pretty way on 't to discover
 your longing. come, come, i 'll disarm you,
 and arm you thus: yet this is wondrous strange.
 julia. compare thy form and my eyes together,
 you 'll find my love no such great miracle.
 now you 'll say
 i am wanton: this nice modesty in ladies
 is but a troublesome familiar
 that haunts them.
 bosola. know you me, i am a blunt soldier.
 julia. the better:
 sure, there wants fire where there are no lively sparks
 of roughness.
 bosola. and i want compliment.
 julia. why, ignorance
 in courtship cannot make you do amiss,
 if you have a heart to do well.
 bosola. you are very fair.
 julia. nay, if you lay beauty to my charge,
 i must plead unguilty.
 bosola. your bright eyes
 carry a quiver of darts in them sharper
 than sun-beams.
 julia. you will mar me with commendation,
 put yourself to the charge of courting me,
 whereas now i woo you.
 bosola. [aside.] i have it, i will work upon this creature.—
 let us grow most amorously familiar:
 if the great cardinal now should see me thus,
 would he not count me a villain?
 julia. no; he might count me a wanton,
 not lay a scruple of offence on you;
 for if i see and steal a diamond,
 the fault is not i' th' stone, but in me the thief
 that purloins it. i am sudden with you.
 we that are great women of pleasure use to cut off
 these uncertain wishes and unquiet longings,
 and in an instant join the sweet delight
 and the pretty excuse together. had you been i' th' street,
 under my chamber-window, even there
 i should have courted you.
 bosola. o, you are an excellent lady!
 julia. bid me do somewhat for you presently
 to express i love you.
 bosola. i will; and if you love me,
 fail not to effect it.
 the cardinal is grown wondrous melancholy;
 demand the cause, let him not put you off
 with feign'd excuse; discover the main ground on 't.
 julia. why would you know this?
 bosola. i have depended on him,
 and i hear that he is fall'n in some disgrace
 with the emperor: if he be, like the mice
 that forsake falling houses, i would shift
 to other dependance.
 julia. you shall not need
 follow the wars: i 'll be your maintenance.
 bosola. and i your loyal servant: but i cannot
 leave my calling.
 julia. not leave an ungrateful
 general for the love of a sweet lady!
 you are like some cannot sleep in feather-beds,
 but must have blocks for their pillows.
 bosola. will you do this?
 julia. cunningly.
 bosola. to-morrow i 'll expect th' intelligence.
 julia. to-morrow! get you into my cabinet;
 you shall have it with you. do not delay me,
 no more than i do you: i am like one
 that is condemn'd; i have my pardon promis'd,
 but i would see it seal'd. go, get you in:
 you shall see my wind my tongue about his heart
 like a skein of silk.
 [exit bosola.]
 [re-enter cardinal]
 cardinal. where are you?
 [enter servants.]
 servants. here.
 cardinal. let none, upon your lives, have conference
 with the prince ferdinand, unless i know it.—
 [aside] in this distraction he may reveal
 the murder.
 [exeunt servants.]
 yond 's my lingering consumption:
 i am weary of her, and by any means
 would be quit of.
 julia. how now, my lord! what ails you?
 cardinal. nothing.
 julia. o, you are much alter'd:
 come, i must be your secretary, and remove
 this lead from off your bosom: what 's the matter?
 cardinal. i may not tell you.
 julia. are you so far in love with sorrow
 you cannot part with part of it? or think you
 i cannot love your grace when you are sad
 as well as merry? or do you suspect
 i, that have been a secret to your heart
 these many winters, cannot be the same
 unto your tongue?
 cardinal. satisfy thy longing,—
 the only way to make thee keep my counsel
 is, not to tell thee.
 julia. tell your echo this,
 or flatterers, that like echoes still report
 what they hear though most imperfect, and not me;
 for if that you be true unto yourself,
 i 'll know.
 cardinal. will you rack me?
 julia. no, judgment shall
 draw it from you: it is an equal fault,
 to tell one's secrets unto all or none.
 cardinal. the first argues folly.
 julia. but the last tyranny.
 cardinal. very well: why, imagine i have committed
 some secret deed which i desire the world
 may never hear of.
 julia. therefore may not i know it?
 you have conceal'd for me as great a sin
 as adultery. sir, never was occasion
 for perfect trial of my constancy
 till now: sir, i beseech you——
 cardinal. you 'll repent it.
 julia. never.
 cardinal. it hurries thee to ruin: i 'll not tell thee.
 be well advis'd, and think what danger 'tis
 to receive a prince's secrets. they that do,
 had need have their breasts hoop'd with adamant
 to contain them. i pray thee, yet be satisfi'd;
 examine thine own frailty; 'tis more easy
 to tie knots than unloose them. 'tis a secret
 that, like a ling'ring poison, may chance lie
 spread in thy veins, and kill thee seven year hence.
 julia. now you dally with me.
 cardinal. no more; thou shalt know it.
 by my appointment the great duchess of malfi
 and two of her young children, four nights since,
 were strangl'd.
 julia. o heaven! sir, what have you done!
 cardinal. how now? how settles this? think you your bosom
 will be a grave dark and obscure enough
 for such a secret?
 julia. you have undone yourself, sir.
 cardinal. why?
 julia. it lies not in me to conceal it.
 cardinal. no?
 come, i will swear you to 't upon this book.
 julia. most religiously.
 cardinal. kiss it.
 [she kisses the book.]
 now you shall never utter it; thy curiosity
 hath undone thee; thou 'rt poison'd with that book.
 because i knew thou couldst not keep my counsel,
 i have bound thee to 't by death.
 [re-enter bosola]
 bosola. for pity-sake, hold!
 cardinal. ha, bosola!
 julia. i forgive you
 this equal piece of justice you have done;
 for i betray'd your counsel to that fellow.
 he over-heard it; that was the cause i said
 it lay not in me to conceal it.
 bosola. o foolish woman,
 couldst not thou have poison'd him?
 julia. 'tis weakness,
 too much to think what should have been done. i go,
 i know not whither.
 [dies.]
 cardinal. wherefore com'st thou hither?
 bosola. that i might find a great man like yourself,
 not out of his wits, as the lord ferdinand,
 to remember my service.
 cardinal. i 'll have thee hew'd in pieces.
 bosola. make not yourself such a promise of that life
 which is not yours to dispose of.
 cardinal. who plac'd thee here?
 bosola. her lust, as she intended.
 cardinal. very well:
 now you know me for your fellow-murderer.
 bosola. and wherefore should you lay fair marble colours
 upon your rotten purposes to me?
 unless you imitate some that do plot great treasons,
 and when they have done, go hide themselves i' th' grave
 of those were actors in 't?
 cardinal. no more; there is
 a fortune attends thee.
 bosola. shall i go sue to fortune any longer?
 'tis the fool's pilgrimage.
 cardinal. i have honours in store for thee.
 bosola. there are a many ways that conduct to seeming
 honour, and some of them very dirty ones.
 cardinal. throw to the devil
 thy melancholy. the fire burns well;
 what need we keep a stirring of 't, and make
 a greater smother?[] thou wilt kill antonio?
 bosola. yes.
 cardinal. take up that body.
 bosola. i think i shall
 shortly grow the common bier for church-yards.
 cardinal. i will allow thee some dozen of attendants
 to aid thee in the murder.
 bosola. o, by no means. physicians that apply horse-leeches
 to any rank swelling use to cut off their tails, that the blood
 may run through them the faster: let me have no train when i go
 to shed blood, less it make me have a greater when i ride
 to the gallows.
 cardinal. come to me after midnight, to help to remove
 that body to her own lodging. i 'll give out
 she died o' th' plague; 'twill breed the less inquiry
 after her death.
 bosola. where 's castruccio her husband?
 cardinal. he 's rode to naples, to take possession
 of antonio's citadel.
 bosola. believe me, you have done a very happy turn.
 cardinal. fail not to come. there is the master-key
 of our lodgings; and by that you may conceive
 what trust i plant in you.
 bosola. you shall find me ready.
 exit cardinal.
 o poor antonio, though nothing be so needful
 to thy estate as pity, yet i find
 nothing so dangerous! i must look to my footing:
 in such slippery ice-pavements men had need
 to be frost-nail'd well, they may break their necks else;
 the precedent 's here afore me. how this man
 bears up in blood! seems fearless! why, 'tis well;
 security some men call the suburbs of hell,
 only a dead wall between. well, good antonio,
 i 'll seek thee out; and all my care shall be
 to put thee into safety from the reach
 of these most cruel biters that have got
 some of thy blood already. it may be,
 i 'll join with thee in a most just revenge.
 the weakest arm is strong enough that strikes
 with the sword of justice. still methinks the duchess
 haunts me: there, there!—'tis nothing but my melancholy.
 o penitence, let me truly taste thy cup,
 that throws men down only to raise them up!
 exit.
 scene iii[]
 [enter] antonio and delio. echo (from the duchess's grave)
 delio. yond 's the cardinal's window. this fortification
 grew from the ruins of an ancient abbey;
 and to yond side o' th' river lies a wall,
 piece of a cloister, which in my opinion
 gives the best echo that you ever heard,
 so hollow and so dismal, and withal
 so plain in the distinction of our words,
 that many have suppos'd it is a spirit
 that answers.
 antonio. i do love these ancient ruins.
 we never tread upon them but we set
 our foot upon some reverend history;
 and, questionless, here in this open court,
 which now lies naked to the injuries
 of stormy weather, some men lie interr'd
 lov'd the church so well, and gave so largely to 't,
 they thought it should have canopied their bones
 till dooms-day. but all things have their end;
 churches and cities, which have diseases like to men,
 must have like death that we have.
 echo. like death that we have.
 delio. now the echo hath caught you.
 antonio. it groan'd methought, and gave
 a very deadly accent.
 echo. deadly accent.
 delio. i told you 'twas a pretty one. you may make it
 a huntsman, or a falconer, a musician,
 or a thing of sorrow.
 echo. a thing of sorrow.
 antonio. ay, sure, that suits it best.
 echo. that suits it best.
 antonio. 'tis very like my wife's voice.
 echo. ay, wife's voice.
 delio. come, let us walk further from t.
 i would not have you go to the cardinal's to-night:
 do not.
 echo. do not.
 delio. wisdom doth not more moderate wasting sorrow
 than time. take time for 't; be mindful of thy safety.
 echo. be mindful of thy safety.
 antonio. necessity compels me.
 make scrutiny through the passages
 of your own life, you 'll find it impossible
 to fly your fate.
 echo. o, fly your fate!
 delio. hark! the dead stones seem to have pity on you,
 and give you good counsel.
 antonio. echo, i will not talk with thee,
 for thou art a dead thing.
 echo. thou art a dead thing.
 antonio. my duchess is asleep now,
 and her little ones, i hope sweetly. o heaven,
 shall i never see her more?
 echo. never see her more.
 antonio. i mark'd not one repetition of the echo
 but that; and on the sudden a clear light
 presented me a face folded in sorrow.
 delio. your fancy merely.
 antonio. come, i 'll be out of this ague,
 for to live thus is not indeed to live;
 it is a mockery and abuse of life.
 i will not henceforth save myself by halves;
 lose all, or nothing.
 delio. your own virtue save you!
 i 'll fetch your eldest son, and second you.
 it may be that the sight of his own blood
 spread in so sweet a figure may beget
 the more compassion. however, fare you well.
 though in our miseries fortune have a part,
 yet in our noble sufferings she hath none.
 contempt of pain, that we may call our own.
 exeunt.
 scene iv[]
 [enter] cardinal, pescara, malatesti, roderigo, and grisolan
 cardinal. you shall not watch to-night by the sick prince;
 his grace is very well recover'd.
 malatesti. good my lord, suffer us.
 cardinal. o, by no means;
 the noise, and change of object in his eye,
 doth more distract him. i pray, all to bed;
 and though you hear him in his violent fit,
 do not rise, i entreat you.
 pescara. so, sir; we shall not.
 cardinal. nay, i must have you promise
 upon your honours, for i was enjoin'd to 't
 by himself; and he seem'd to urge it sensibly.
 pescara. let our honours bind this trifle.
 cardinal. nor any of your followers.
 malatesti. neither.
 cardinal. it may be, to make trial of your promise,
 when he 's asleep, myself will rise and feign
 some of his mad tricks, and cry out for help,
 and feign myself in danger.
 malatesti. if your throat were cutting,
 i 'd not come at you, now i have protested against it.
 cardinal. why, i thank you.
 grisolan. 'twas a foul storm to-night.
 roderigo. the lord ferdinand's chamber shook like an osier.
 malatesti. 'twas nothing put pure kindness in the devil
 to rock his own child.
 exeunt [all except the cardinal].
 cardinal. the reason why i would not suffer these
 about my brother, is, because at midnight
 i may with better privacy convey
 julia's body to her own lodging. o, my conscience!
 i would pray now; but the devil takes away my heart
 for having any confidence in prayer.
 about this hour i appointed bosola
 to fetch the body. when he hath serv'd my turn,
 he dies.
 exit.
 [enter bosola]
 bosola. ha! 'twas the cardinal's voice; i heard him name
 bosola and my death. listen; i hear one's footing.
 [enter ferdinand]
 ferdinand. strangling is a very quiet death.
 bosola. [aside.] nay, then, i see i must stand upon my guard.
 ferdinand. what say to that? whisper softly: do you agree to 't?
 so; it must be done i' th' dark; the cardinal would not for
 a thousand pounds the doctor should see it.
 exit.
 bosola. my death is plotted; here 's the consequence of murder.
 we value not desert nor christian breath,
 when we know black deeds must be cur'd with death.
 [enter antonio and servant]
 servant. here stay, sir, and be confident, i pray;
 i 'll fetch you a dark lantern.
 exit.
 antonio. could i take him at his prayers,
 there were hope of pardon.
 bosola. fall right, my sword!—
 [stabs him.]
 i 'll not give thee so much leisure as to pray.
 antonio. o, i am gone! thou hast ended a long suit
 in a minute.
 bosola. what art thou?
 antonio. a most wretched thing,
 that only have thy benefit in death,
 to appear myself.
 [re-enter servant with a lantern]
 servant. where are you, sir?
 antonio. very near my home.—bosola!
 servant. o, misfortune!
 bosola. smother thy pity, thou art dead else.—antonio!
 the man i would have sav'd 'bove mine own life!
 we are merely the stars' tennis-balls, struck and banded
 which way please them.—o good antonio,
 i 'll whisper one thing in thy dying ear
 shall make thy heart break quickly! thy fair duchess
 and two sweet children——
 antonio. their very names
 kindle a little life in me.
 bosola. are murder'd.
 antonio. some men have wish'd to die
 at the hearing of sad tidings; i am glad
 that i shall do 't in sadness.[] i would not now
 wish my wounds balm'd nor heal'd, for i have no use
 to put my life to. in all our quest of greatness,
 like wanton boys whose pastime is their care,
 we follow after bubbles blown in th' air.
 pleasure of life, what is 't? only the good hours
 of an ague; merely a preparative to rest,
 to endure vexation. i do not ask
 the process of my death; only commend me
 to delio.
 bosola. break, heart!
 antonio. and let my son fly the courts to princes.
 [dies.]
 bosola. thou seem'st to have lov'd antonio.
 servant. i brought him hither,
 to have reconcil'd him to the cardinal.
 bosola. i do not ask thee that.
 take him up, if thou tender thine own life,
 and bear him where the lady julia
 was wont to lodge.—o, my fate moves swift!
 i have this cardinal in the forge already;
 now i 'll bring him to th' hammer. o direful misprision![]
 i will not imitate things glorious.
 no more than base; i 'll be mine own example.—
 on, on, and look thou represent, for silence,
 the thing thou bear'st.[]
 exeunt.
 scene v[]
 [enter] cardinal, with a book
 cardinal. i am puzzl'd in a question about hell;
 he says, in hell there 's one material fire,
 and yet it shall not burn all men alike.
 lay him by. how tedious is a guilty conscience!
 when i look into the fish-ponds in my garden,
 methinks i see a thing arm'd with a rake,
 that seems to strike at me.
 [enter bosola, and servant bearing antonio's body]
 now, art thou come?
 thou look'st ghastly;
 there sits in thy face some great determination
 mix'd with some fear.
 bosola. thus it lightens into action:
 i am come to kill thee.
 cardinal. ha!—help! our guard!
 bosola. thou art deceiv'd; they are out of thy howling.
 cardinal. hold; and i will faithfully divide
 revenues with thee.
 bosola. thy prayers and proffers
 are both unseasonable.
 cardinal. raise the watch!
 we are betray'd!
 bosola. i have confin'd your flight:
 i 'll suffer your retreat to julia's chamber,
 but no further.
 cardinal. help! we are betray'd!
 [enter, above, pescara, malatesti, roderigo, and grisolan]
 malatesti. listen.
 cardinal. my dukedom for rescue!
 roderigo. fie upon his counterfeiting!
 malatesti. why, 'tis not the cardinal.
 roderigo. yes, yes, 'tis he:
 but, i 'll see him hang'd ere i 'll go down to him.
 cardinal. here 's a plot upon me; i am assaulted! i am lost,
 unless some rescue!
 grisolan. he doth this pretty well;
 but it will not serve to laugh me out of mine honour.
 cardinal. the sword's at my throat!
 roderigo. you would not bawl so loud then.
 come, come, let 's go to bed: he told us this much aforehand.
 pescara. he wish'd you should not come at him; but, believe 't,
 the accent of the voice sounds not in jest:
 i 'll down to him, howsoever, and with engines
 force ope the doors.
 [exit above.]
 roderigo. let 's follow him aloof,
 and note how the cardinal will laugh at him.
 [exeunt, above, malatesti, roderigo, and grisolan.]
 bosola. there 's for you first,
 'cause you shall not unbarricade the door
 to let in rescue.
 kills the servant.
 cardinal. what cause hast thou to pursue my life?
 bosola. look there.
 cardinal. antonio!
 bosola. slain by my hand unwittingly.
 pray, and be sudden. when thou kill'd'st thy sister,
 thou took'st from justice her most equal balance,
 and left her naught but her sword.
 cardinal. o, mercy!
 bosola. now it seems thy greatness was only outward;
 for thou fall'st faster of thyself than calamity
 can drive thee. i 'll not waste longer time; there!
 [stabs him.]
 cardinal. thou hast hurt me.
 bosola. again!
 cardinal. shall i die like a leveret,
 without any resistance?—help, help, help!
 i am slain!
 [enter ferdinand]
 ferdinand. th' alarum! give me a fresh horse;
 rally the vaunt-guard, or the day is lost,
 yield, yield! i give you the honour of arms
 shake my sword over you; will you yield?
 cardinal. help me; i am your brother!
 ferdinand. the devil!
 my brother fight upon the adverse party!
 he wounds the cardinal, and, in the scuffle, gives bosola
 his death-wound.
 there flies your ransom.
 cardinal. o justice!
 i suffer now for what hath former bin:
 sorrow is held the eldest child of sin.
 ferdinand. now you 're brave fellows. caesar's fortune was harder
 than pompey's; caesar died in the arms of prosperity, pompey at the
 feet of disgrace. you both died in the field. the pain 's nothing;
 pain many times is taken away with the apprehension of greater,
 as the tooth-ache with the sight of a barber that comes to pull
 it out. there 's philosophy for you.
 bosola. now my revenge is perfect.—sink, thou main cause
 kills ferdinand.
 of my undoing!—the last part of my life
 hath done me best service.
 ferdinand. give me some wet hay; i am broken-winded.
 i do account this world but a dog-kennel:
 i will vault credit and affect high pleasures
 beyond death.
 bosola. he seems to come to himself,
 now he 's so near the bottom.
 ferdinand. my sister, o my sister! there 's the cause on 't.
 whether we fall by ambition, blood, or lust,
 like diamonds, we are cut with our own dust.
 [dies.]
 cardinal. thou hast thy payment too.
 bosola. yes, i hold my weary soul in my teeth;
 'tis ready to part from me. i do glory
 that thou, which stood'st like a huge pyramid
 begun upon a large and ample base,
 shalt end in a little point, a kind of nothing.
 [enter, below, pescara, malatesti, roderigo, and grisolan]
 pescara. how now, my lord!
 malatesti. o sad disaster!
 roderigo. how comes this?
 bosola. revenge for the duchess of malfi murdered
 by the arragonian brethren; for antonio
 slain by this hand; for lustful julia
 poison'd by this man; and lastly for myself,
 that was an actor in the main of all
 much 'gainst mine own good nature, yet i' the end
 neglected.
 pescara. how now, my lord!
 cardinal. look to my brother:
 he gave us these large wounds, as we were struggling
 here i' th' rushes. and now, i pray, let me
 be laid by and never thought of.
 [dies.]
 pescara. how fatally, it seems, he did withstand
 his own rescue!
 malatesti. thou wretched thing of blood,
 how came antonio by his death?
 bosola. in a mist; i know not how:
 such a mistake as i have often seen
 in a play. o, i am gone!
 we are only like dead walls or vaulted graves,
 that, ruin'd, yield no echo. fare you well.
 it may be pain, but no harm, to me to die
 in so good a quarrel. o, this gloomy world!
 in what a shadow, or deep pit of darkness,
 doth womanish and fearful mankind live!
 let worthy minds ne'er stagger in distrust
 to suffer death or shame for what is just:
 mine is another voyage.
 [dies.]
 pescara. the noble delio, as i came to th' palace,
 told me of antonio's being here, and show'd me
 a pretty gentleman, his son and heir.
 [enter delio, and antonio's son]
 malatesti. o sir, you come too late!
 delio. i heard so, and
 was arm'd for 't, ere i came. let us make noble use
 of this great ruin; and join all our force
 to establish this young hopeful gentleman
 in 's mother's right. these wretched eminent things
 leave no more fame behind 'em, than should one
 fall in a frost, and leave his print in snow;
 as soon as the sun shines, it ever melts,
 both form and matter. i have ever thought
 nature doth nothing so great for great men
 as when she 's pleas'd to make them lords of truth:
 integrity of life is fame's best friend,
 which nobly, beyond death, shall crown the end.
 exeunt.
  (return) [ malfi. the presence-chamber
 in the palace of the duchess.]
  (return) [ prevent.]
  (return) [ the same.]
  (return) [ the reference is to the
 knightly sport of riding at the ring.]
  (return) [ at the expense of.]
  (return) [ rolls of lint used to dress
 wounds.]
  (return) [ surgeons.]
  (return) [ a small horse.]
  (return) [ ballasted.]
  (return) [ a lively dance.]
  (return) [ throws into the shade.]
  (return) [ at the point of.]
  (return) [ coaches.]
  (return) [ spy.]
  (return) [ cheats.]
  (return) [ spy.]
  (return) [ malfi. gallery in the
 duchess' palace.]
  (return) [ lustful.]
  (return) [ genesis xxxi., -.]
  (return) [ the net in which he
 caught venus and mars.]
  (return) [ housekeepers.]
  (return) [ produced.]
  (return) [ qq. read strange.]
  (return) [ guess.]
  (return) [ the phrase used to
 indicate that accounts had been examined and found correct.]
  (return) [ using words of present
 time; i.e., "i take," not "i will take."]
  (return) [ knot.]
  (return) [ more firmly.]
  (return) [ of difficult
 disposition.]
  (return) [ malfi. an apartment in
 the palace of the duchess.]
  (return) [ chief part.]
  (return) [ bullies (hazlitt);
 lawyers (vaughan).]
  (return) [ royal journey.]
  (return) [ turning a boat on its
 side for repairs.]
  (return) [ scabbed.]
  (return) [ empty.]
  (return) [ face-modeling (sampson).
 "there's a plain statement of your practises."]
  (return) [ blue like those of a
 woman with child.]
  (return) [ scurf.]
  (return) [ person of highest
 influence.]
  (return) [ hysteria.]
  (return) [ this year.]
  (return) [ clearly.]
  (return) [ youngster.]
  (return) [ a hall in the same
 palace.]
  (return) [ crossness.]
  (return) [ always.]
  (return) [ the meaner servants.]
  (return) [ at once.]
  (return) [ cast his horoscope.]
