their regrets that the play had been dragged from its obscurity. the
obscure drama, however, had become for five years past part of the
literature of europe. it is performed regularly or intermittently in
holland, sweden, italy, france, and russia, and it has been translated
into every european language, including the czech. it forms part of the
repertoire of the german stage, where it is performed more often than
any play by any english writer except shakespeare. owing, perhaps, to
what i must call its obscure popularity in the continental theatres,
dr. strauss was preparing his remarkable opera at the very moment when
there appeared the criticisms to which i refer, and since the production
of the opera in dresden in december, , english musical journalists
and correspondents always refer to the work as founded on wilde's drama.
that is the only way in which they can evade an awkward truth—a
palpable contravention to their own wishes and theories. the music,
however, has been set to the actual words of "salomé" in madame hedwig
lachmann's admirable translation. the words have not been transfigured
into ordinary operatic nonsense to suit the score, or the
susceptibilities of the english people. i observe that admirers of dr.
strauss are a little mortified that the great master should have found
an occasion for composition in a play which they long ago consigned to
oblivion and the shambles of aubrey beardsley. wilde himself, in a
rhetorical period, seems to have contemplated the possibility of his
prose drama for a musical theme. in "de profundis" he says: "the
refrains, whose recurring motifs make 'salomé' so like a piece of music,
and bind it together as a ballad."
he was still incarcerated in , when mons. luigne poë produced the
play for the first time at the théâtre libre in paris, with lina muntz
in the title role. a rather pathetic reference to this occasion occurs
in a letter wilde wrote to me from reading:—
"please say how gratified i was at the performance of my play, and have
my thanks conveyed to luigne poë. it is something that at a time of
disgrace and shame i should still be regarded as an artist. i wish i
could feel more pleasure, but i seem dead to all emotions except those
of anguish and despair. however, please let luigne poë know that i am
sensible of the honour he has done me. he is a poet himself. write to me
in answer to this, and try and see what lemaitre, bauer, and sarcey said
of 'salomé.'"
the bias of personal friendship precludes me from praising or defending
"salomé," even if it were necessary to do so. nothing i might say would
add to the reputation of its detractors. its sources are obvious;
particularly flaubert and maeterlinck, in whose peculiar and original
style it is an essay. a critic, for whom i have a greater regard than
many of his contemporaries, says that "salomé" is only a catalogue; but
a catalogue can be intensely dramatic, as we know when the performance
takes place at christie's; few plays are more exciting than an auction
in king street when the stars are fighting for sisera.
it has been remarked that wilde confuses herod the great (mat. xi. ),
herod antipas (mat. xiv. ), and herod agrippa (acts xiii), but the
confusion is intentional, as in mediæval mystery plays herod is taken
for a type, not an historical character, and the criticism is about as
valuable as that of people who laboriously point out the anachronisms in
beardsley's designs. with reference to the charge of plagiarism brought
against "salomé" and its author, i venture to mention a personal
recollection.
wilde complained to me one day that someone in a well-known novel had
stolen an idea of his. i pleaded in defence of the culprit that wilde
himself was a fearless literary thief. "my dear fellow," he said, with
his usual drawling emphasis, "when i see a monstrous tulip with four
wonderful petals in someone else's garden, i am impelled to grow a
monstrous tulip with five wonderful petals, but that is no reason why
someone should grow a tulip with only three petals." that was oscar
[] a more recent performance of "salomé" (), by the
literary theatre club, has again produced an ebullition of rancour and
deliberate misrepresentation on the part of the dramatic critics, the
majority of whom are anxious to parade their ignorance of the
continental stage. the production was remarkable on account of the
beautiful dresses and mounting, for which mr. charles ricketts was
responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of herod by mr. robert
farquharson. wilde used to say that "salomé" was a mirror in which
everyone could see himself. the artist, art; the dull, dulness; the
vulgar, vulgarity.
cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for the
first time.
may th and th .
salomé—miss millicent murby.
slave—miss carrie keith.
herodias—miss louise salom.
slave—miss stansfeld.
scene—the great terrace outside the palace.
scene.—a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to the
right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the back, an old
cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze. moonlight.
how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!
look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman rising
from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she was looking
for dead things.
she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears a yellow
veil, and whose feet are of silver. she is like a princess who has
little white doves for feet. you would fancy she was dancing.
she is like a woman who is dead. she moves very slowly.
[noise in the banqueting-hall.]
what an uproar! who are those wild beasts howling?
the jews. they are always like that. they are disputing about their
religion.
why do they dispute about their religion?
i cannot tell. they are always doing it. the pharisees, for instance,
say that there are angels, and the sadducees declare that angels do not
exist.
i think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.
how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!
you are always looking at her. you look at her too much. it is dangerous
to look at people in such fashion. something terrible may happen.
she is very beautiful to-night.
the tetrarch has a sombre look.
yes; he has a sombre look.
he is looking at something.
he is looking at some one.
at whom is he looking?
i cannot tell.
how pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is like the
shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver. 
you must not look at her. you look too much at her.
herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.
is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?
yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.
the tetrarch is very fond of wine. he has wine of three sorts. one which
is brought from the island of samothrace, and is purple like the cloak
of cæsar.
i have never seen cæsar.
another that comes from a town called cyprus, and is yellow like gold.
i love gold.
and the third is a wine of sicily. that wine is red like blood.
the gods of my country are very fond of blood. twice in the year we
sacrifice to them young men and maidens; fifty young men and a hundred
maidens. but it seems we never give them quite enough, for they are very
harsh to us.
in my country there are no gods left. the romans have driven them out.
there are some who say that they have hidden themselves in the
mountains, but i do not believe it. three nights i have been on the
mountains seeking them everywhere. i did not find them. and at last i
called them by their names, and they did not come. i think they are
dead.
the jews worship a god that you cannot see.
i cannot understand that.
in fact, they only believe in things that you cannot see.
that seems to me altogether ridiculous.
after me shall come another mightier than i. i am not worthy so much as
to unloose the latchet of his shoes. when he cometh, the solitary places
shall be glad. they shall blossom like the lily. the eyes of the blind
shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf shall be opened. the
new-born child shall put his hand upon the dragon's lair, he shall lead
the lions by their manes.
make him be silent. he is always saying ridiculous things.
no, no. he is a holy man. he is very gentle, too. every day, when i give
him to eat he thanks me.
who is he?
a prophet.
what is his name?
jokanaan.
whence comes he?
from the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. he was clothed
in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern belt. he was very
terrible to look upon. a great multitude used to follow him. he even had
disciples.
what is he talking of?
we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.
may one see him?
no. the tetrarch has forbidden it.
the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white hands
are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they are like
white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.
what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.
[pointing to the cistern.]
what a strange prison!
it is an old cistern.
an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.
oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother, the
first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for twelve
years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve years he had to be
strangled.
strangled? who dared to do that?
[pointing to the executioner, a huge negro.]
that man yonder, naaman.
he was not afraid?
oh no! the tetrarch sent him the ring.
what ring?
the death-ring. so he was not afraid.
yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.
why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.
i think it terrible.
the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very troubled.
ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards us. how pale she
is! never have i seen her so pale.
do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.
she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.
[enter salomé.]
i will not stay. i cannot stay. why does the tetrarch look at me all the
while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? it is strange that
the husband of my mother looks at me like that. i know not what it
means. in truth, yes, i know it.
you have just left the feast, princess?
how sweet the air is here! i can breathe here! within there are jews
from jerusalem who are tearing each other in pieces over their foolish
ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and spill their wine on
the pavement, and greeks from smyrna with painted eyes and painted
cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in twisted coils, and silent, subtle
egyptians, with long nails of jade and russett cloaks, and romans brutal
and coarse, with their uncouth jargon. ah! how i loathe the romans! they
are rough and common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.
will you be seated, princess?
why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something terrible
will happen.
how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money, you would
think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold and chaste. i am
sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty. yes, she is a virgin.
she has never defiled herself. she has never abandoned herself to men,
like the other goddesses.
the lord hath come. the son of man hath come. the centaurs have hidden
themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the rivers, and are
lying beneath the leaves of the forest.
who was that who cried out?
the prophet, princess.
ah, the prophet! he of whom the tetrarch is afraid?
we know nothing of that, princess. it was the prophet jokanaan who cried
out.
is it your pleasure that i bid them bring your litter, princess? the
night is fair in the garden.
he says terrible things about my mother, does he not?
we never understand what he says, princess.
yes; he says terrible things about her.
[enter a slave.]
princess, the tetrarch prays you to return to the feast.
i will not go back.
pardon me, princess, but if you do not return some misfortune may
happen.
is he an old man, this prophet?
princess, it were better to return. suffer me to lead you in.
this prophet ... is he an old man?
no, princess, he is quite a young man.
you cannot be sure. there are those who say he is elias.
who is elias?
a very ancient prophet of this country, princess.
what answer may i give the tetrarch from the princess?
rejoice not thou, land of palestine, because the rod of him who smote
thee is broken. for from the seed of the serpent shall come forth a
basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the birds.
what a strange voice! i would speak with him.
i fear it is impossible, princess. the tetrarch does not wish any one to
speak with him. he has even forbidden the high priest to speak with him.
i desire to speak with him.
it is impossible, princess.
i will speak with him.
would it not be better to return to the banquet?
bring forth this prophet.
[exit the slave.]
we dare not, princess.
[approaching the cistern and looking down into it.]
how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so black a
pit! it is like a tomb.... [to the soldiers.] did you not hear me?
bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.
princess, i beg you do not require this of us.
you keep me waiting!
princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this thing.
[looking at the young syrian.]
ah!
oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will happen.
[going up to the young syrian.]
you will do this tiling for me, will you not, narraboth? you will do
this thing for me. i have always been kind to you. you will do it for
me. i would but look at this strange prophet. men have talked so much of
him. often have i heard the tetrarch talk of him. i think the tetrarch
is afraid of him. are you, even you, also afraid of him, narraboth?
i fear him not, princess; there is no man i fear. but the tetrarch has
formally forbidden that any man should raise the cover of this well.
you will do this thing for me, narraboth, and to-morrow when i pass in
my litter beneath the gateway of the idol-sellers i will let fall for
you a little flower, a little green flower.
princess, i cannot, i cannot.
[smiling.]
you will do this thing for me, narraboth. you know that you will do this
thing for me. and to-morrow when i pass in my litter by the bridge of
the idol-buyers, i will look at you through the muslin veils, i will
look at you, narraboth, it may be i will smile at you. look at me,
narraboth, look at me. ah! you know that you will do what i ask of you.
you know it well.... i know that you will do this thing.
[signing to the third soldier.]
let the prophet come forth.... the princess salomé desires to see him.
ah!
oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand of a
dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.
she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes are
eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling like a little
princess.
[the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and steps
slowly back.]
where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? where is he, who in a
robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the people? bid him
come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who hath cried in the
waste places and in the houses of kings.
of whom is he speaking?
you can never tell, princess.
where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the walls, the
images of the chaldeans limned in colours, gave herself up unto the lust
of her eyes, and sent ambassadors into chaldea?
it is of my mother that he speaks.
oh, no, princess.
yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.
where is she who gave herself unto the captains of assyria, who have
baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on their heads?
where is she who hath given herself to the young men of egypt, who are
clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields are of gold, whose
helmets are of silver, whose bodies are mighty? bid her rise up from the
bed of her abominations, from the bed of her incestuousness, that she
may hear the words of him who prepareth the way of the lord, that she
may repent her of her iniquities. though she will never repent, but will
stick fast in her abominations; bid her come, for the fan of the lord is
in his hand.
but he is terrible, he is terrible!
do not stay here, princess, i beseech you.
it is his eyes above all that are terrible. they are like black holes
burned by torches in a tyrian tapestry. they are like black caverns
where dragons dwell. they are like the black caverns of egypt in which
the dragons make their lairs. they are like black lakes troubled by
fantastic moons.... do you think he will speak again?
do not stay here, princess. i pray you do not stay here.
how wasted he is! he is like a thin ivory statue. he is like an image of
silver. i am sure he is chaste as the moon is. he is like a moonbeam,
like a shaft of silver. his flesh must be cool like ivory. i would look
closer at him.
no, no, princess.
i must look at him closer.
princess! princess!
who is this woman who is looking at me? i will not have her look at me.
wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under her gilded
eyelids? i know not who she is. i do not wish to know who she is. bid
her begone. it is not to her that i would speak.
i am salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.
back! daughter of babylon! come not near the chosen of the lord. thy
mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities, and the
cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of god.
speak again, jokanaan. thy voice is wine to me.
princess! princess! princess!
speak again! speak again, jokanaan, and tell me what i must do.
daughter of sodom, come not near me! but cover thy face with a veil, and
scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the desert and seek out
the son of man.
who is he, the son of man? is he as beautiful as thou art, jokanaan?
get thee behind me! i hear in the palace the beating of the wings of the
angel of death.
princess, i beseech thee to go within.
angel of the lord god, what dost thou here with thy sword? whom seekest
thou in this foul palace? the day of him who shall die in a robe of
silver has not yet come.
jokanaan!
who speaketh?
jokanaan, i am amorous of thy body! thy body is white like the lilies of
a field that the mower hath never mowed. thy body is white like the
snows that lie on the mountains, like the snows that lie on the
mountains of judæa, and come down into the valleys. the roses in the
garden of the queen of arabia are not so white as thy body. neither the
roses in the garden of the queen of arabia, the perfumed garden of
spices of the queen of arabia, nor the feet of the dawn when they light
on the leaves, nor the breast of the moon when she lies on the breast of
the sea.... there is nothing in the world so white as thy body. let me
touch thy body.
back! daughter of babylon! by woman came evil into the world. speak not
to me. i will not listen to thee. i listen but to the voice of the lord
god.
thy body is hideous. it is like the body of a leper. it is like a
plastered wall where vipers have crawled; like a plastered wall where
the scorpions have made their nest. it is like a whitened sepulchre full
of loathsome things. it is horrible, thy body is horrible. it is of thy
hair that i am enamoured, jokanaan. thy hair is like clusters of grapes,
like the clusters of black grapes that hang from the vine-trees of edom
in the land of the edomites. thy hair is like the cedars of lebanon,
like the great cedars of lebanon that give their shade to the lions and
to the robbers who would hide themselves by day. the long black nights,
when the moon hides her face, when the stars are afraid, are not so
black. the silence that dwells in the forest is not so black. there is
nothing in the world so black as thy hair.... let me touch thy hair.
back, daughter of sodom! touch me not. profane not the temple of the
lord god.
thy hair is horrible. it is covered with mire and dust. it is like a
crown of thorns which they have placed on thy forehead. it is like a
knot of black serpents writhing round thy neck. i love not thy hair....
it is thy mouth that i desire, jokanaan. thy mouth is like a band of
scarlet on a tower of ivory. it is like a pomegranate cut with a knife
of ivory. the pomegranate-flowers that blossom in the gardens of tyre,
and are redder than roses, are not so red. the red blasts of trumpets
that herald the approach of kings, and make afraid the enemy, are not so
red. thy mouth is redder than the feet of those who tread the wine in
the wine-press. thy mouth is redder than the feet of the doves who haunt
the temples and are fed by the priests. it is redder than the feet of
him who cometh from a forest where he hath slain a lion, and seen gilded
tigers. thy mouth is like a branch of coral that fishers have found in
the twilight of the sea, the coral that they keep for the kings!... it
is like the vermilion that the moabites find in the mines of moab, the
vermilion that the kings take from them. it is like the bow of the king
of the persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. there is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... let me
kiss thy mouth.
never! daughter of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.
i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.
princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who art
the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him! do not
speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them.... princess, princess, do
not speak these things.
i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.
ah! [he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan.]
the young syrian has slain himself! the young captain has slain himself!
he has slain himself who was my friend! i gave him a little box of
perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now he has killed himself!
ah, did he not foretell that some misfortune would happen? i, too,
foretold it, and it has happened. well i knew that the moon was seeking
a dead thing, but i knew not that it was he whom she sought. ah! why did
i not hide him from the moon? if i had hidden him in a cavern she would
not have seen him.
princess, the young captain has just killed himself.
let me kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.
art thou not afraid, daughter of herodias? did i not tell thee that i
had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the angel of death,
and hath he not come, the angel of death?
let me kiss thy mouth.
daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is he of
whom i spake. go seek him. he is in a boat on the sea of galilee, and he
talketh with his disciples. kneel down on the shore of the sea, and call
unto him by his name. when he cometh to thee (and to all who call on him
he cometh), bow thyself at his feet and ask of him the remission of thy
sins.
let me kiss thy mouth.
cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou accursed!
i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.
i do no wish to look at thee. i will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, salomé, thou art accursed. [he goes down into the cistern.]
i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan; i will kiss thy mouth.
we must bear away the body to another place. the tetrarch does not care
to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he himself has slain.
he was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. i gave him a little
box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore always on his
hand. in the evening we used to walk by the river, among the almond
trees, and he would tell me of the things of his country. he spake ever
very low. the sound of his voice was like the sound of the flute, of a
flute player. also he much loved to gaze at himself in the river. i used
to reproach him for that.
you are right; we must hide the body. the tetrarch must not see it.
the tetrarch will not come to this place. he never comes on the terrace.
he is too much afraid of the prophet.
[enter herod, herodias, and all the court.]
where is salomé? where is the princess? why did she not return to the
banquet as i commanded her? ah! there she is!
you must not look at her! you are always looking at her!
the moon has a strange look to-night. has she not a strange look? she is
like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere for lovers. she
is naked too. she is quite naked. the clouds are seeking to clothe her
nakedness, but she will not let them. she shows herself naked in the
sky. she reels through the clouds like a drunken woman.... i am sure she
is looking for lovers. does she not reel like a drunken woman? she is
like a mad woman, is she not?
no; the moon is like the moon, that is all. let us go within.... you
have nothing to do here.
i will stay here! manesseh, lay carpets there. light torches, bring
forth the ivory tables, and the tables of jasper. the air here is
delicious. i will drink more wine with my guests. we must show all
honours to the ambassadors of cæsar.
it is not because of them that you remain.
yes; the air is delicious. come, herodias, our guests await us. ah! i
have slipped! i have slipped in blood! it is an ill omen. it is a very
evil omen. wherefore is there blood here?... and this body, what does
this body here? think you i am like the king of egypt, who gives no
feast to his guests but that he shows them a corpse? whose is it? i will
not look on it.
it is our captain, sire. he is the young syrian whom you made captain
only three days ago.
i gave no order that he should be slain.
he killed himself, sire.
for what reason? i had made him captain.
we do not know, sire. but he killed himself.
that seems strange to me. i thought it was only the roman philosophers
who killed themselves. is it not true, tigellinus, that the philosophers
at rome kill themselves?
there are some who kill themselves, sire. they are the stoics. the
stoics are coarse people. they are ridiculous people. i myself regard
them as being perfectly ridiculous.
i also. it is ridiculous to kill oneself.
everybody at rome laughs at them. the emperor has written a satire
against them. it is recited everywhere.
ah! he has written a satire against them? cæsar is wonderful. he can do
everything.... it is strange that the young syrian has killed himself. i
am sorry he has killed himself. i am very sorry; for he was fair to look
upon. he was even very fair. he had very languorous eyes. i remember
that i saw that he looked languorously at salomé. truly, i thought he
looked too much at her.
there are others who look at her too much.
his father was a king. i drove him from his kingdom. and you made a
slave of his mother, who was a queen, herodias. so he was here as my
guest, as it were, and for that reason i made him my captain. i am sorry
he is dead. ho! why have you left the body here? i will not look at
it—away with it! [they take away the body.] it is cold here. there is
a wind blowing. is there not a wind blowing?
no; there is no wind.
i tell you there is a wind that blows.... and i hear in the air
something that is like the beating of wings, like the beating of vast
wings. do you not hear it?
i hear nothing.
i hear it no longer. but i heard it. it was the blowing of the wind, no
doubt. it has passed away. but no, i hear it again. do you not hear it?
it is just like the beating of wings.
i tell you there is nothing. you are ill. let us go within.
i am not ill. it is your daughter who is sick. she has the mien of a
sick person. never have i seen her so pale.
i have told you not to look at her.
pour me forth wine [wine is brought]. salomé, come drink a little wine
with me. i have here a wine that is exquisite. cæsar himself sent it me.
dip into it thy little red lips, that i may drain the cup. 
i am not thirsty, tetrarch.
you hear how she answers me, this daughter of yours?
she does right. why are you always gazing at her?
bring me ripe fruits [fruits are brought]. salomé, come and eat fruit
with me. i love to see in a fruit the mark of thy little teeth. bite but
a little of this fruit and then i will eat what is left.
i am not hungry, tetrarch.
[to herodias.] you see how you have brought up this daughter of yours.
my daughter and i come of a royal race. as for thee, thy father was a
camel driver! he was also a robber!
thou liest!
thou knowest well that it is true.
salomé, come and sit next to me. i will give thee the throne of thy
mother.
i am not tired, tetrarch.
you see what she thinks of you.
bring me—what is it that i desire? i forget. ah! ah! i remember.
lo! the time is come! that which i foretold has come to pass, saith the
lord god. lo! the day of which i spoke.
bid him be silent. i will not listen to his voice. this man is for ever
vomiting insults against me.
he has said nothing against you. besides, he is a very great prophet.
i do not believe in prophets. can a man tell what will come to pass? no
man knows it. moreover, he is for ever insulting me. but i think you are
afraid of him.... i know well that you are afraid of him.
i am not afraid of him. i am afraid of no man.
i tell you, you are afraid of him. if you are not afraid of him why do
you not deliver him to the jews, who for these six months past have been
clamouring for him?
truly, my lord, it were better to deliver him into our hands.
enough on this subject. i have already given you my answer. i will not
deliver him into your hands. he is a holy man. he is a man who has seen
god.
that cannot be. there is no man who hath seen god since the prophet
elias. he is the last man who saw god. in these days god doth not show
himself. he hideth himself. therefore great evils have come upon the
land.
verily, no man knoweth if elias the prophet did indeed see god.
peradventure it was but the shadow of god that he saw.
god is at no time hidden. he showeth himself at all times and in
everything. god is in what is evil even as he is in what is good.
that must not be said. it is a very dangerous doctrine. it is a doctrine
that cometh from the schools at alexandria, where men teach the
philosophy of the greeks. and the greeks are gentiles: they are not even
circumcised.
no one can tell how god worketh. his ways are very mysterious. it may be
that the things which we call evil are good, and that the things which
we call good are evil. there is no knowledge of any thing. we must needs
submit to everything, for god is very strong. he breaketh in pieces the
strong together with the weak, for he regardeth not any man.
thou speaketh truly. god is terrible; he breaketh the strong and the
weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. but this man hath never seen god.
no man hath seen god since the prophet elias.
make them be silent. they weary me.
but i have heard it said that jokanaan himself is your prophet elias.
that cannot be. it is more than three hundred years since the days of
the prophet elias.
there be some who say that this man is the prophet elias.
i am sure that he is the prophet elias.
nay, but he is not the prophet elias.
so the day is come, the day of the lord, and i hear upon the mountains
the feet of him who shall be the saviour of the world.
what does that mean? the saviour of the world.
it is a title that cæsar takes.
but cæsar is not coming into judæa. only yesterday i received letters
from rome. they contained nothing concerning this matter. and you,
tigellinus, who were at rome during the winter, you heard nothing
concerning this matter, did you?
sire, i heard nothing concerning the matter. i was explaining the title.
it is one of cæsar's titles.
but cæsar cannot come. he is too gouty. they say that his feet are like
the feet of an elephant. also there are reasons of state. he who leaves
rome loses rome. he will not come. howbeit, cæsar is lord, he will come
if he wishes. nevertheless, i do not think he will come.
it was not concerning cæsar that the prophet spake these words, sire.
not of cæsar?
no, sire.
concerning whom then did he speak?
concerning messias who has come.
messiah hath not come.
he hath come, and everywhere he worketh miracles.
herodias ho! ho! miracles! i do not believe in miracles. i have seen too
many. [to the page.] my fan!
this man worketh true miracles. thus, at a marriage which took place in
a little town of galilee, a town of some importance, he changed water
into wine. certain persons who were present related it to me. also he
healed two lepers that were seated before the gate of capernaum simply
by touching them.
nay, it was blind men that he healed at capernaum.
nay; they were lepers. but he hath healed blind people also, and he was
seen on a mountain talking with angels.
angels do not exist.
angels exist, but i do not believe that this man has talked with them.
he was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.
not with angels.
how these men weary me! they are ridiculous! [to the page.] well! my
fan! [the page gives her the fan.] you have a dreamer's look; you must
not dream. it is only sick people who dream. [she strikes the page with
her fan.]
there is also the miracle of the daughter of jairus.
yes, that is sure. no man can gainsay it.
these men are mad. they have looked too long on the moon. command them
to be silent.
what is this miracle of the daughter of jairus?
the daughter of jairus was dead. he raised her from the dead.
he raises the dead?
yea, sire, he raiseth the dead.
i do not wish him to do that. i forbid him to do that. i allow no man to
raise the dead. this man must be found and told that i forbid him to
raise the dead. where is this man at present?
he is in every place, my lord, but it is hard to find him.
it is said that he is now in samaria.
it is easy to see that this is not messias, if he is in samaria. it is
not to the samaritans that messias shall come. the samaritans are
accursed. they bring no offerings to the temple.
he left samaria a few days since. i think that at the present moment he
is in the neighbourhood of jerusalem.
no; he is not there. i have just come from jerusalem. for two months
they have had no tidings of him.
no matter! but let them find him, and tell him from me, i will not allow
him to raise the dead! to change water into wine, to heal the lepers and
the blind.... he may do these things if he will. i say nothing against
these things. in truth i hold it a good deed to heal a leper. but i
allow no man to raise the dead. it would be terrible if the dead came
back.
ah! the wanton! the harlot! ah! the daughter of babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!—thus saith the lord god, let there
come up against her a multitude of men. let the people take stones and
stone her....
command him to be silent.
let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush her
beneath their shields.
nay, but it is infamous.
it is thus that i will wipe out all wickedness from the earth, and that
all women shall learn not to imitate her abominations.
you hear what he says against me? you allow him to revile your wife?
he did not speak your name.
what does that matter? you know well that it is i whom he seeks to
revile. and i am your wife, am i not?
of a truth, dear and noble herodias, you are my wife, and before that
you were the wife of my brother.
it was you who tore me from his arms.
of a truth i was stronger.... but let us not talk of that matter. i do
not desire to talk of it. it is the cause of the terrible words that the
prophet has spoken. peradventure on account of it a misfortune will
come. let us not speak of this matter. noble herodias, we are not
mindful of our guests. fill thou my cup, my well-beloved. fill with wine
the great goblets of silver, and the great goblets of glass. i will
drink to cæsar. there are romans here, we must drink to cæsar.
cæsar! cæsar!
do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?
what is it to you if she be pale or not?
never have i seen her so pale.
you must not look at her.
in that day the sun shall become black like sackcloth of hair, and the
moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the heavens shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from the fig-tree, and the kings
of the earth shall be afraid.
ah! ah! i should like to see that day of which he speaks, when the moon
shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall upon the earth
like ripe figs. this prophet talks like a drunken man ... but i cannot
suffer the sound of his voice. i hate his voice. command him to be
silent.
i will not. i cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it may be
an omen.
i do not believe in omens. he speaks like a drunken man.
it may be he is drunk with the wine of god.
what wine is that, the wine of god? from what vineyards is it gathered?
in what wine-press may one find it?
[from this point he looks all the while at salomé.]
tigellinus, when you were at rome of late, did the emperor speak with
you on the subject of...?
on what subject, sire?
on what subject? ah! i asked you a question, did i not? i have forgotten
what i would have asked you.
you are looking again at my daughter. you must not look at her. i have
already said so.
you say nothing else.
i say it again.
and that restoration of the temple about which they have talked so
much, will anything be done? they say the veil of the sanctuary has
disappeared, do they not?
it was thyself didst steal it. thou speakest at random. i will not stay
here. let us go within.
dance for me, salomé.
i will not have her dance.
i have no desire to dance, tetrarch.
salomé, daughter of herodias, dance for me.
let her alone.
i command thee to dance, salomé.
i will not dance, tetrarch.
[laughing].
you see how she obeys you.
what is it to me whether she dance or not? it is naught to me. to-night
i am happy, i am exceeding happy. never have i been so happy.
the tetrarch has a sombre look. has he not a sombre look?
yes, he has a sombre look.
wherefore should i not be happy? cæsar, who is lord of the world, who is
lord of all things, loves me well. he has just sent me most precious
gifts. also he has promised me to summon to rome the king of cappadocia,
who is my enemy. it may be that at rome he will crucify him, for he is
able to do all things that he wishes. verily, cæsar is lord. thus you
see i have a right to be happy. indeed, i am happy. i have never been so
happy. there is nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.
he shall be seated on this throne. he shall be clothed in scarlet and
purple. in his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his blasphemies.
and the angel of the lord shall smite him. he shall be eaten of worms.
you hear what he says about you. he says that you will be eaten of
worms.
it is not of me that he speaks. he speaks never against me. it is of the
king of cappadocia that he speaks; the king of cappadocia, who is mine
enemy. it is he who shall be eaten of worms. it is not i. never has he
spoken word against me, this prophet, save that i sinned in taking to
wife the wife of my brother. it may be he is right. for, of a truth, you
are sterile.
i am sterile, i? you say that, you that are ever looking at my daughter,
you that would have her dance for your pleasure? it is absurd to say
that. i have borne a child. you have gotten no child, no, not even from
one of your slaves. it is you who are sterile, not i.
peace, woman! i say that you are sterile. you have borne me no child,
and the prophet says that our marriage is not a true marriage. he says
that it is an incestuous marriage, a marriage that will bring evils....
i fear he is right; i am sure that he is right. but it is not the moment
to speak of such things. i would be happy at this moment. of a truth, i
am happy. there is nothing i lack.
i am glad you are of so fair a humour to-night. it is not your custom.
but it is late. let us go within. do not forget that we hunt at sunrise.
all honours must be shown to cæsar's ambassadors, must they not?
what a sombre look the tetrarch wears.
yes, he wears a sombre look.
salomé, salomé, dance for me. i pray thee dance for me. i am sad
to-night. yes; i am passing sad to-night. when i came hither i slipped
in blood, which is an evil omen; and i heard, i am sure i heard in the
air a beating of wings, a beating of giant wings. i cannot tell what
they mean ... i am sad to-night. therefore dance for me. dance for me,
salomé, i beseech you. if you dance for me you may ask of me what you
will, and i will give it you, even unto the half of my kingdom.
[rising.] will you indeed give me whatsoever i shall ask, tetrarch?
do not dance, my daughter.
everything, even the half of my kingdom.
you swear it, tetrarch?
i swear it, salomé.
do not dance, my daughter.
by what will you swear, tetrarch?
by my life, by my crown, by my gods. whatsoever you desire i will give
it you, even to the half of my kingdom, if you will but dance for me. o,
salomé, salomé, dance for me!
you have sworn, tetrarch.
i have sworn, salomé.
all this i ask, even the half of your kingdom.
my daughter, do not dance.
even to the half of my kingdom. thou wilt be passing fair as a queen,
salomé, if it please thee to ask for the half of my kingdom. will she
not be fair as a queen? ah! it is cold here! there is an icy wind, and i
hear ... wherefore do i hear in the air this beating of wings? ah! one
might fancy a bird, a huge black bird that hovers over the terrace. why
can i not see it, this bird? the beat of its wings is terrible. the
breath of the wind of its wings is terrible. it is a chill wind. nay,
but it is not cold, it is hot. i am choking. pour water on my hands.
give me snow to eat. loosen my mantle. quick! quick! loosen my mantle.
nay, but leave it. it is my garland that hurts me, my garland of roses.
the flowers are like fire. they have burned my forehead. [he tears the
wreath from his head and throws it on the table.] ah! i can breathe
now. how red those petals are! they are like stains of blood on the
cloth. that does not matter. you must not find symbols in everything you
see. it makes life impossible. it were better to say that stains of
blood are as lovely as rose petals. it were better far to say that....
but we will not speak of this. now i am happy, i am passing happy. have
i not the right to be happy? your daughter is going to dance for me.
will you not dance for me, salomé? you have promised to dance for me.
i will not have her dance.
i will dance for you, tetrarch.
you hear what your daughter says. she is going to dance for me. you do
well to dance for me, salomé. and when you have danced for me, forget
not to ask of me whatsoever you wish. whatsoever you wish i will give it
you, even to the half of my kingdom. i have sworn it, have i not?
you have sworn it, tetrarch.
and i have never broken my word. i am not of those who break their
oaths. i know not how to lie. i am the slave of my word, and my word is
the word of a king. the king of cappadocia always lies, but he is no
true king. he is a coward. also he owes me money that he will not repay.
he has even insulted my ambassadors. he has spoken words that were
wounding. but cæsar will crucify him when he comes to rome. i am sure
that cæsar will crucify him. and if not, yet will he die, being eaten of
worms. the prophet has prophesied it. well! wherefore dost thou tarry,
salomé?
i am awaiting until my slaves bring perfumes to me and the seven veils,
and take off my sandals. [slaves bring perfumes and the seven veils,
and take off the sandals of salomé.]
ah, you are going to dance with naked feet. 'tis well!—'tis well. your
little feet will be like white doves. they will be like little white
flowers that dance upon the trees.... no, no, she is going to dance on
blood. there is blood spilt on the ground. she must not dance on blood.
it were an evil omen.
what is it to you if she dance on blood? thou hast waded deep enough
therein....
what is it to me? ah! look at the moon! she has become red. she has
become red as blood. ah! the prophet prophesied truly. he prophesied
that the moon would become red as blood. did he not prophesy it? all of
you heard him. and now the moon has become red as blood. do ye not see
it?
oh, yes, i see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs, are
they not? and the sun is becoming black like sackcloth of hair, and the
kings of the earth are afraid. that at least one can see. the prophet,
for once in his life, was right, the kings of the earth are afraid....
let us go within. you are sick. they will say at rome that you are mad.
let us go within, i tell you.
who is this who cometh from edom, who is this who cometh from bozra,
whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the beauty of his
garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness? wherefore is thy raiment
stained with scarlet?
let us go within. the voice of that man maddens me. i will not have my
daughter dance while he is continually crying out. i will not have her
dance while you look at her in this fashion. in a word, i will not have
her dance.
do not rise, my wife, my queen, it will avail thee nothing. i will not
go within till she hath danced. dance, salomé, dance for me.
do not dance, my daughter.
i am ready, tetrarch.
[salomé dances the dance of the seven veils.]
ah! wonderful! wonderful! you see that she has danced for me, your
daughter. come near, salomé, come near, that i may give you your reward.
ah! i pay the dancers well. i will pay thee royally. i will give thee
whatsoever thy soul desireth. what wouldst thou have? speak.
[kneeling].
i would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....
[laughing.]
in a silver charger? surely yes, in a silver charger. she is charming,
is she not? what is it you would have in a silver charger, o sweet and
fair salomé, you who are fairer than all the daughters of judæa? what
would you have them bring thee in a silver charger? tell me. whatsoever
it may be, they shall give it you. my treasures belong to thee. what is
it, salomé?
[rising].
the head of jokanaan.
ah! that is well said, my daughter.
no, no!
that is well said, my daughter.
no, no, salomé. you do not ask me that. do not listen to your mother's
voice. she is ever giving you evil counsel. do not heed her.
i do not heed my mother. it is for mine own pleasure that i ask the head
of jokanaan in a silver charger. you hath sworn, herod. forget not that
you have sworn an oath.
i know it. i have sworn by my gods. i know it well. but i pray you,
salomé, ask of me something else. ask of me the half of my kingdom, and
i will give it you. but ask not of me what you have asked.
i ask of you the head of jokanaan.
no, no, i do not wish it.
you have sworn, herod.
yes, you have sworn. everybody heard you. you swore it before
everybody.
be silent! it is not to you i speak.
my daughter has done well to ask the head of jokanaan. he has covered me
with insults. he has said monstrous things against me. one can see that
she loves her mother well. do not yield, my daughter. he has sworn, he
has sworn.
be silent, speak not to me!... come, salomé, be reasonable. i have
never been hard to you. i have ever loved you.... it may be that i have
loved you too much. therefore ask not this thing of me. this is a
terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me. surely, i think thou art
jesting. the head of a man that is cut from his body is ill to look
upon, is it not? it is not meet that the eyes of a virgin should look
upon such a thing. what pleasure could you have in it? none. no, no, it
is not what you desire. hearken to me. i have an emerald, a great round
emerald, which cæsar's minion sent me. if you look through this emerald
you can see things which happen at a great distance. cæsar himself
carries such an emerald when he goes to the circus. but my emerald is
larger. i know well that it is larger. it is the largest emerald in the
whole world. you would like that, would you not? ask it of me and i will
give it you.
i demand the head of jokanaan.
you are not listening. you are not listening. suffer me to speak,
salomé.
the head of jokanaan.
no, no, you would not have that. you say that to trouble me, because i
have looked at you all this evening. it is true, i have looked at you
all this evening. your beauty troubled me. your beauty has grievously
troubled me, and i have looked at you too much. but i will look at you
no more. neither at things, nor at people should one look. only in
mirrors should one look, for mirrors do but show us masks. oh! oh! bring
wine! i thirst.... salomé, salomé, let us be friends. come now!... ah!
what would i say? what was't? ah! i remember!... salomé—nay, but come
nearer to me; i fear you will not hear me—salomé, you know my white
peacocks, my beautiful white peacocks, that walk in the garden between
the myrtles and the tall cypress trees. their beaks are gilded with
gold, and the grains that they eat are gilded with gold also, and their
feet are stained with purple. when they cry out the rain comes, and the
moon shows herself in the heavens when they spread their tails. two by
two they walk between the cypress trees and the black myrtles, and each
has a slave to tend it. sometimes they fly across the trees, and anon
they crouch in the grass, and round the lake. there are not in all the
world birds so wonderful. there is no king in all the world who
possesses such wonderful birds. i am sure that cæsar himself has no
birds so fair as my birds. i will give you fifty of my peacocks. they
will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the midst of them you will
be like the moon in the midst of a great white cloud.... i will give
them all to you. i have but a hundred, and in the whole world there is
no king who has peacocks like unto my peacocks. but i will give them all
to you. only you must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that
which you have asked of me.
[he empties the cup of wine.]
give me the head of jokanaan.
well said, my daughter! as for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.
be silent! you cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey. you
must not. your voice wearies me. be silent, i say salomé, think of what
you are doing. this man comes perchance from god. he is a holy man. the
finger of god has touched him. god has put into his mouth terrible
words. in the palace as in the desert god is always with him.... at
least it is possible. one does not know. it is possible that god is for
him and with him. furthermore, if he died some misfortune might happen
to me. in any case, he said that the day he dies a misfortune will
happen to some one. that could only be to me. remember, i slipped in
blood when i entered. also, i heard a beating of wings in the air, a
beating of mighty wings. these are very evil omens, and there were
others. i am sure there were others though i did not see them. well,
salomé, you do not wish a misfortune to happen to me? you do not wish
that. listen to me, then.
give me the head of jokanaan.
ah! you are not listening to me. be calm. i—i am calm. i am quite calm.
listen. i have jewels hidden in this place—jewels that your mother even
has never seen; jewels that are marvellous. i have a collar of pearls,
set in four rows. they are like unto moons chained with rays of silver.
they are like fifty moons caught in a golden net. on the ivory of her
breast a queen has worn it. thou shalt be as fair as a queen when thou
wearest it. i have amethysts of two kinds, one that is black like wine,
and one that is red like wine which has been coloured with water. i have
topazes, yellow as are the eyes of tigers, and topazes that are pink as
the eyes of a wood-pigeon, and green topazes that are as the eyes of
cats. i have opals that burn always, with an icelike flame, opals that
make sad men's minds, and are fearful of the shadows. i have onyxes like
the eyeballs of a dead woman. i have moonstones that change when the
moon changes, and are wan when they see the sun. i have sapphires big
like eggs, and as blue as blue flowers. the sea wanders within them and
the moon comes never to trouble the blue of their waves. i have
chrysolites and beryls and chrysoprases and rubies. i have sardonyx and
hyacinth stones, and stones of chalcedony, and i will give them all to
you, all, and other things will i add to them. the king of the indies
has but even now sent me four fans fashioned from the feathers of
parrots, and the king of numidia a garment of ostrich feathers. i have a
crystal, into which it is not lawful for a woman to look, nor may young
men behold it until they have been beaten with rods. in a coffer of
nacre i have three wondrous turquoises. he who wears them on his
forehead can imagine things which are not, and he who carries them in
his hand can make women sterile. these are great treasures above all
price. they are treasures without price. but this is not all. in an
ebony coffer i have two cups of amber, that are like apples of gold. if
an enemy pour poison into these cups, they become like an apple of
silver. in a coffer incrusted with amber i have sandals incrusted with
glass. i have mantles that have been brought from the land of the seres,
and bracelets decked about with carbuncles and with jade that come from
the city of euphrates.... what desirest thou more than this, salomé?
tell me the thing that thou desirest, and i will give it thee. all that
thou askest i will give thee, save one thing. i will give thee all that
is mine, save one life. i will give thee the mantle of the high priest.
i will give thee the veil of the sanctuary.
oh! oh! 
give me the head of jokanaan.
[sinking back in his seat]. let her be given what she asks! of a truth
she is her mother's child! [the first soldier approaches. herodias
draws from the hand of the tetrarch the ring of death and gives it to
the soldier, who straightway bears it to the executioner. the
executioner looks scared.] who has taken my ring? there was a ring on
my right hand. who has drunk my wine? there was wine in my cup. it was
full of wine. someone has drunk it! oh! surely some evil will befall
some one. [the executioner goes down into the cistern.] ah! wherefore
did i give my oath? kings ought never to pledge their word. if they keep
it not, it is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.
my daughter has done well.
i am sure that some misfortune will happen.
[she leans over the cistern and listens.]
there is no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this man?
ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would struggle, i
would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike, i tell you.... no,
i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible silence. ah! something
has fallen upon the ground. i heard something fall. it is the sword of
the headsman. he is afraid, this slave. he has let his sword fall. he
dare not kill him. he is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent.
[she sees the page of herodias and addresses him.] come hither, thou
wert the friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee,
there are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised me,
the thing that is mine. [the page recoils. she turns to the soldiers.]
hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern and bring me the head
of this man. [the soldiers recoil.] tetrarch, tetrarch, command your
soldiers that they bring me the head of jokanaan.
[a huge black arm, the arm of the executioner, comes forth from the
cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of jokanaan. salomé seizes
it. herod hides his face with his cloak. herodias smiles and fans
herself. the nazarenes fall on their knees and begin to pray.]
ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. well! i will
kiss it now. i will bite it with my teeth as one bites a ripe fruit.
yes, i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i said it; did i not say it? i
said it. ah! i will kiss it now.... but, wherefore dost thou not look at
me, jokanaan? thine eyes that were so terrible, so full of rage and
scorn, are shut now. wherefore are they shut? open thine eyes! lift up
thine eyelids, jokanaan! wherefore dost thou not look at me? art thou
afraid of me, jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... and thy
tongue, that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its venom upon
me. it is strange, is it not? how is it that the red viper stirs no
longer?... thou wouldst have none of me, jokanaan. thou didst reject me.
thou didst speak evil words against me. thou didst treat me as a harlot,
as a wanton, me, salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa! well,
jokanaan, i still live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to
me. i can do with it what i will. i can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. that which the dogs leave, the birds of the air shall
devour.... ah, jokanaan, jokanaan, thou wert the only man that i have
loved. all other men are hateful to me. but thou, thou wert beautiful!
thy body was a column of ivory set on a silver socket. it was a garden
full of doves and of silver lilies. it was a tower of silver decked with
shields of ivory. there was nothing in the world so white as thy body.
there was nothing in the world so black as thy hair. in the whole world
there was nothing so red as thy mouth. thy voice was a censer that
scattered strange perfumes, and when i looked on thee i heard a strange
music. ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me, jokanaan? behind thine
hands and thy curses thou didst hide thy face. thou didst put upon thine
eyes the covering of him who would see his god. well, thou hast seen thy
god, jokanaan, but me, me, thou didst never see. if thou hadst seen me
thou wouldst have loved me. i, i saw thee, jokanaan, and i loved thee.
oh, how i loved thee! i love thee yet, jokanaan, i love thee only.... i
am athirst for thy beauty; i am hungry for thy body; and neither wine
nor fruits can appease my desire. what shall i do now, jokanaan? neither
the floods nor the great waters can quench my passion. i was a princess,
and thou didst scorn me. i was a virgin, and thou didst take my
virginity from me. i was chaste, and thou didst fill my veins with
fire.... ah! ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me, jokanaan? if thou
hadst looked at me thou hadst loved me. well i know that thou wouldst
have loved me, and the mystery of love is greater than the mystery of
death. love only should one consider.
she is monstrous, thy daughter, she is altogether monstrous. in truth,
what she has done is a great crime. i am sure that it was a crime
against an unknown god.
i approve of what my daughter has done. and i will stay here now.
[rising].
ah! there speaks the incestuous wife! come! i will not stay here. come,
i tell thee. surely some terrible thing will befall. manasseh, issachar,
ozias, put out the torches. i will not look at things, i will not suffer
things to look at me. put out the torches! hide the moon! hide the
stars! let us hide ourselves in our palace, herodias. i begin to be
afraid.
[the slaves put out the torches. the stars disappear. a great black
cloud crosses the moon and conceals it completely. the stage becomes
very dark. the tetrarch begins to climb the staircase.]
ah! i have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan, i have kissed thy mouth. there
was a bitter taste on thy lips. was it the taste of blood?... but
perchance it is the taste of love.... they say that love hath a bitter
taste.... but what of that? what of that? i have kissed thy mouth,
jokanaan.
[a moonbeam falls on salomé covering her with light.]
[turning round and seeing salomé.]
kill that woman!
[the soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields salomé,
daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.]
end of the project gutenberg ebook of salomé, by oscar wilde
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by marc d'hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(images generously made available by the internet archive.)
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
