 within this circle is jehovah's name,
 forward and backward anagrammatiz'd,
 th' abbreviated names of holy saints,
 figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
 and characters of signs and erring  stars,
 by which the spirits are enforc'd to rise:
 then fear not, faustus, to be resolute,
 and try the utmost magic can perform.
 [thunder.]
 sint mihi dii acherontis propitii! valeat numen triplex jehovoe!
 ignei, aerii, aquatani spiritus, salvete! orientis princeps
 belzebub, inferni ardentis monarcha, et demogorgon, propitiamus
 vos, ut appareat et surgat mephistophilis dragon, quod tumeraris: 
 per jehovam, gehennam, et consecratam aquam quam nunc spargo,
 signumque crucis quod nunc facio, et per vota nostra, ipse nunc
 surgat nobis dicatus  mephistophilis!
 enter mephistophilis.
 i charge thee to return, and change thy shape;
 thou art too ugly to attend on me:
 go, and return an old franciscan friar;
 that holy shape becomes a devil best.
 [exit mephistophilis.]
 i see there's virtue in my heavenly words.
 who would not be proficient in this art?
 how pliant is this mephistophilis,
 full of obedience and humility!
 such is the force of magic and my spells.
 re-enter mephistophilis like a franciscan friar.
 mephist. now, faustus, what wouldst thou have me do?
 faustus. i charge thee wait upon me whilst i live,
 to do whatever faustus shall command,
 be it to make the moon drop from her sphere,
 or the ocean to overwhelm the world.
 mephist. i am a servant to great lucifer,
 and may not follow thee without his leave:
 no more than he commands must we perform.
 faustus. did not he charge thee to appear to me?
 mephist. no, i came hither  of mine own accord.
 faustus. did not my conjuring speeches  raise thee? speak!
 mephist. that was the cause, but yet per accidens; 
 for, when we hear one rack the name of god,
 abjure the scriptures and his saviour christ,
 we fly, in hope to get his glorious soul;
 nor will we come, unless he use such means
 whereby he is in danger to be damn'd.
 therefore the shortest cut for conjuring
 is stoutly to abjure all godliness,
 and pray devoutly to the prince of hell.
 faustus. so faustus hath
 already done; and holds this principle,
 there is no chief but only belzebub;
 to whom faustus doth dedicate himself.
 this word "damnation" terrifies not me,
 for i confound hell in elysium:
 my ghost be with the old philosophers!
 but, leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
 tell me what is that lucifer thy lord?
 mephist. arch-regent and commander of all spirits.
 faustus. was not that lucifer an angel once?
 mephist. yes, faustus, and most dearly lov'd of god.
 faustus. how comes it, then, that he is prince of devils?
 mephist. o, by aspiring pride and insolence;
 for which god threw him from the face of heaven.
 faustus. and what are you that live with lucifer?
 mephist. unhappy spirits that fell  with lucifer,
 conspir'd against our god with lucifer,
 and are for ever damn'd with lucifer.
 faustus. where are you damn'd?
 mephist. in hell.
 faustus. how comes it, then, that thou art out of hell?
 mephist. why, this is hell, nor am i out of it:
 think'st thou that i, that saw the face of god,
 and tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
 am not tormented with ten thousand hells,
 in being depriv'd of everlasting bliss?
 o, faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
 which strike  a terror to my fainting soul!
 faustus. what, is great mephistophilis so passionate
 for being deprived of the joys of heaven?
 learn thou of faustus manly fortitude,
 and scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
 go bear these tidings to great lucifer:
 seeing faustus hath incurr'd eternal death
 by desperate thoughts against jove's deity,
 say, he surrenders up to him his soul,
 so he will spare him four and twenty years,
 letting him live in all voluptuousness;
 having thee ever to attend on me,
 to give me whatsoever i shall ask,
 to tell me whatsoever i demand,
 to slay mine enemies, and to aid my friends,
 and always be obedient to my will.
 go, and return to mighty lucifer,
 and meet me in my study at midnight,
 and then resolve me of thy master's mind.
 mephist. i will, faustus.
 [exit.]
 faustus. had i as many souls as there be stars,
 i'd give them all for mephistophilis.
 by him i'll be great emperor of the world,
 and make a bridge thorough  the moving air,
 to pass the ocean with a band of men;
 i'll join the hills that bind the afric shore,
 and make that country continent to spain,
 and both contributary to my crown:
 the emperor shall not live but by my leave,
 nor any potentate of germany.
 now that i have obtain'd what i desir'd,
 i'll live in speculation of this art,
 till mephistophilis return again.
 [exit.]
 enter wagner and clown.
 wagner. come hither, sirrah boy.
 clown. boy! o, disgrace to my person! zounds, boy in your face!
 you have seen many boys with beards, i am sure.
 wagner. sirrah,  hast thou no comings in?
 clown. yes, and goings out too, you may see, sir.
 wagner. alas, poor slave! see how poverty jests in his nakedness!
 i know the villain's out of service, and so hungry, that i know
 he would give his soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton,
 though it were blood-raw.
 clown. not so neither: i had need to have it well roasted, and
 good sauce to it, if i pay so dear, i can tell you.
 wagner. sirrah, wilt thou be my man, and wait on me, and i will
 make thee go like qui mihi discipulus?
 clown. what, in verse?
 wagner. no, slave; in beaten silk and staves-acre.
 clown. staves-acre! that's good to kill vermin: then, belike,
 if i serve you, i shall be lousy.
 wagner. why, so thou shalt be, whether thou dost it or no; for,
 sirrah, if thou dost not presently bind thyself to me for seven
 years, i'll turn all the lice about thee into familiars, and make
 them tear thee in pieces.
 clown. nay, sir, you may save  yourself a labour, for they
 are as familiar with me as if they paid for their meat and drink,
 i can tell you.
 wagner. well, sirrah, leave your jesting, and take these guilders.
 [gives money.]
 clown. yes, marry, sir; and i thank you too.
 wagner. so, now thou art to be at an hour's warning, whensoever
 and wheresoever the devil shall fetch thee.
 clown. here, take your guilders again;  i'll none of 'em.
 wagner. not i; thou art pressed: prepare thyself, or  i will
 presently raise up two devils to carry thee away.—banio! belcher!
 clown. belcher! an belcher come here, i'll belch him: i am not
 afraid of a devil.
 enter two devils.
 wagner. how now, sir! will you serve me now?
 clown. ay, good wagner; take away the devil[s], then.
 wagner. spirits, away!
 [exeunt devils.]
 now, sirrah, follow me.
 clown. i will, sir: but hark you, master; will you teach me this
 conjuring occupation?
 wagner. ay, sirrah, i'll teach thee to turn thyself to a dog,
 or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat, or any thing.
 clown. a dog, or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat!
 o, brave, wagner!
 wagner. villain, call me master wagner, and see that you walk
 attentively, and let your right eye be always diametrally fixed
 upon my left heel, that thou mayst quasi vestigiis nostris 
 insistere.
 clown. well, sir, i warrant you.
 [exeunt.]
 faustus discovered in his study.
 faustus. now, faustus,
 must thou needs be damn'd, canst thou not be sav'd.
 what boots it, then, to think on god or heaven?
 away with such vain fancies, and despair;
 despair in god, and trust in belzebub:
 now, go not backward,  faustus; be resolute:
 why  waver'st thou? o, something soundeth in mine ear,
 "abjure this magic, turn to god again!"
 why, he loves thee not;
 the god thou serv'st is thine own appetite,
 wherein is fix'd the love of belzebub:
 to him i'll build an altar and a church,
 and offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.
 enter good angel and evil angel.
 evil angel. go forward, faustus, in that famous  art.
 good angel. sweet faustus, leave that execrable art.
 faustus. contrition, prayer, repentance—what of  these?
 good angel. o, they are means to bring thee unto heaven!
 evil angel. rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
 that make men  foolish that do use them most.
 good angel. sweet faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.
 evil angel. no, faustus; think of honour and of wealth.
 [exeunt angels.]
 faustus. wealth!
 why, the signiory of embden shall be mine.
 when mephistophilis shall stand by me,
 what power can hurt me? faustus, thou art safe:
 cast no more doubts.—mephistophilis, come,
 and bring glad tidings from great lucifer;—
 is't not midnight?—come mephistophilis,
 and bring glad tidings from great lucifer;—
 is't not midnight?—come mephistophilis,
 veni, veni, mephistophile! 
 enter mephistophilis.
 now tell me what saith lucifer, thy lord?
 mephist. that i shall wait on faustus whilst he lives,
 so he will buy my service with his soul.
 faustus. already faustus hath hazarded that for thee.
 mephist. but now thou must bequeath it solemnly,
 and write a deed of gift with thine own blood;
 for that security craves lucifer.
 if thou deny it, i must back to hell.
 faustus. stay, mephistophilis, and tell me, what good will my
 soul do thy lord?
 mephist. enlarge his kingdom.
 faustus. is that the reason why he tempts us thus?
 mephist. solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
 faustus. why, have you any pain that torture others?
 mephist. as great as have the human souls of men.
 but, tell me, faustus, shall i have thy soul?
 and i will be thy slave, and wait on thee,
 and give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.
 faustus. ay, mephistophilis, i'll give it thee. 
 mephist. then, faustus, stab thine  arm courageously,
 and bind thy soul, that at some certain day
 great lucifer may claim it as his own;
 and  then be thou as great as lucifer.
 faustus. [stabbing his arm] lo, mephistophilis, for love of thee,
 faustus hath cut his arm, and with his proper blood
 assures his soul to be great lucifer's,
 chief lord and regent of perpetual night!
 view here this blood that trickles from mine arm,
 and let it be propitious for my  wish.
 mephist. but, faustus,
 write it in manner of a deed of gift.
 faustus. [writing] ay, so i do. but, mephistophilis,
 my blood congeals, and i can write no more.
 mephist. i'll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight.
 [exit.]
 faustus. what might the staying of my blood portend?
 is it  unwilling i should write this bill?
 why streams it not, that i may write afresh?
 faustus gives to thee his soul: o, there it stay'd!
 why shouldst thou not? is not thy soul thine own?
 then write again, faustus gives to thee his soul. 
 re-enter mephistophilis with the chafer of fire.
 mephist. see, faustus, here is fire; set it on.
 faustus. so, now the blood begins to clear again;
 now will i make an  end immediately.
 [writes.]
 mephist. what will not i do to obtain his soul?
 [aside.]
 faustus. consummatum est; this bill is ended,
 and faustus hath bequeath'd his soul to lucifer.
 but what is this inscription on mine arm?
 homo, fuge: whither should  i fly?
 if unto god,  he'll throw me down to hell.
 my senses are deceiv'd; here's nothing writ:—
 o, yes, i see it plain; even here is writ,
 homo, fuge: yet shall not faustus fly.
 mephist. i'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.
 [aside, and then exit.]
 enter devils, giving crowns and rich apparel to faustus.
 they dance, and then depart.
 re-enter mephistophilis.
 faustus. what means this show? speak, mephistophilis.
 mephist. nothing, faustus, but to delight thy mind,
 and let thee see what magic can perform.
 faustus. but may i raise such spirits when i please?
 mephist. ay, faustus, and do greater things than these.
 faustus. then, mephistophilis, receive this scroll, 
 a deed of gift of body and of soul:
 but yet conditionally that thou perform
 all covenants and articles between us both!
 mephist. faustus, i swear by hell and lucifer
 to effect all promises between us both!
 faustus. then hear me read it, mephistophilis.
 [reads.]
 mephist. speak, faustus, do you deliver this as your deed?
 faustus. ay, take it, and the devil give thee good of it!
 mephist. so, now, faustus, ask me what thou wilt.
 faustus. first i will question with  thee about hell.
 tell me, where is the  place that men call hell?
 mephist. under the heavens.
 faustus. ay, so are all things else; but whereabouts?
 mephist. within the bowels of these elements,
 where we are tortur'd and remain for ever:
 hell hath no limits, nor is circumscrib'd
 in one self-place; but where we are is hell,
 and where hell is, there must we ever be:
 and, to be short, when all the world dissolves,
 and every creature shall be purified,
 all places shall be hell that are  not heaven.
 faustus. i think hell's a fable. 
 mephist. ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.
 faustus. why, dost thou think that faustus shall be damn'd?
 mephist. ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
 in which thou hast given thy soul to lucifer.
 faustus. ay, and body too; and what of that?
 think'st thou that faustus is so fond to imagine
 that, after this life, there is any pain?
 no, these are trifles and mere old wives' tales.
 mephist. but i am an instance to prove the contrary,
 for i tell thee i am damn'd and now in hell.
 faustus. nay, an this be hell, i'll willingly be damn'd:
 what! sleeping, eating, walking, and disputing!
 but, leaving this, let me have a wife,
 the fairest maid in germany;
 for i am wanton and lascivious,
 and cannot live without a wife.
 mephist. well, faustus, thou shalt have a wife.
 [mephistophilis fetches in a woman-devil.]
 faustus. what sight is this?
 mephist. now, faustus, wilt thou have a wife?
 faustus. here's a hot whore, indeed: no, i'll no wife.
 mephist. marriage is but a ceremonial toy,
 and, if thou lov'st me, think no more of it.
 i'll cull thee out the fairest courtezans,
 and bring them every morning to thy bed:
 she whom thine  eye shall like, thy  heart shall have,
 were she as chaste as was  penelope,
 as wise as saba, or as beautiful
 as was bright lucifer before his fall.
 here, take this book, peruse it well:
 the iterating of these lines brings gold;
 the framing of this circle on the ground
 brings thunder, whirlwinds, storm, and lightning;
 pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
 and men in harness  shall appear to thee,
 ready to execute what thou command'st.
 faustus. thanks, mephistophilis, for this sweet book:
 this will i keep as chary as my life.
 [exeunt.]
 enter faustus, in his study, and mephistophilis.
 faustus. when i behold the heavens,  then i repent,
 and curse thee, wicked mephistophilis,
 because thou hast depriv'd me of those joys.
 mephist. 'twas thine  own seeking, faustus; thank thyself.
 but, think'st thou heaven is  such a glorious thing?
 i tell thee, faustus, it is not half so fair
 as thou, or any man that breathes  on earth.
 faustus. how prov'st thou that?
 mephist. 'twas made for man; then he's more excellent.
 faustus. if heaven was made for man, 'twas made for me:
 i will renounce this magic and repent.
 enter good angel and evil angel.
 good angel. faustus, repent; yet god will pity thee.
 evil angel. thou art a spirit; god cannot pity thee.
 faustus. who buzzeth in mine ears  i am a spirit?
 be i a devil, yet god may pity me;
 yea, god will pity me, if i repent.
 evil angel. ay, but faustus never shall repent.
 [exeunt angels.]
 faustus. my heart is harden'd, i cannot repent;
 scarce can i name salvation, faith, or heaven:
 swords, poisons, halters, and envenom'd steel
 are laid before me to despatch myself;
 and long ere this i  should have done the deed,
 had not sweet pleasure conquer'd deep despair.
 have not i made blind homer sing to me
 of alexander's love and oenon's death?
 and hath not he, that built the walls of thebes
 with ravishing sound of his melodious harp,
 made music with my mephistophilis?
 why should i die, then, or basely despair?
 i am resolv'd; faustus shall not repent.—
 come, mephistophilis, let us dispute again,
 and reason of divine astrology.
 speak, are there many spheres above the moon?
 are all celestial bodies but one globe,
 as is the substance of this centric earth?
 mephist. as are the elements, such are the heavens,
 even from the moon unto th' empyreal orb,
 mutually folded in each other's spheres,
 and jointly move upon one axletree,
 whose termine  is term'd the world's wide pole;
 nor are the names of saturn, mars, or jupiter
 feign'd, but are erring  stars.
 faustus. but have they all one motion, both situ et tempore?
 mephist. all move from east to west in four-and-twenty
 hours upon the poles of the world; but differ in their motions
 upon the poles of the zodiac.
 faustus. these slender questions wagner can decide:
 hath mephistophilis no greater skill?
 who knows not the double motion  of the planets?
 that the first is finish'd in a natural day;
 the second thus; saturn in thirty years; jupiter in twelve;
 mars in four; the sun, venus, and mercury in a year; the moon
 in twenty-eight days. these are freshmen's questions. but
 tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or intelligentia?
 mephist. ay.
 faustus. how many heavens or spheres are there?
 mephist. nine; the seven planets, the firmament, and the empyreal
 heaven.
 faustus. but is there not coelum igneum et crystallinum?
 mephist. no, faustus, they be but fables.
 faustus. resolve me, then, in this one question; why are not
 conjunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one time,
 but in some years we have more, in some less?
 mephist. per inoequalem motum respectu totius.
 faustus. well, i am answered. now tell me who made the world?
 mephist. i will not.
 faustus. sweet mephistophilis, tell me.
 mephist. move me not, faustus.
 faustus. villain, have i not bound thee to tell me any thing?
 mephist. ay,  that is not against our kingdom; this is.
 thou art damned; think thou of hell.
 faustus. think, faustus, upon god that made the world.
 mephist. remember this.
 [exit.]
 faustus. ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!
 'tis thou hast damn'd distressed faustus' soul.
 is't not too late?
 re-enter good angel and evil angel.
 evil angel. too late.
 good angel. never too late, if faustus will repent.
 evil angel. if thou repent, devils will tear thee in pieces.
 good angel. repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
 [exeunt angels.]
 faustus. o christ, my saviour, my saviour
 help to save distressed faustus' soul!
 enter lucifer, belzebub, and mephistophilis.
 lucifer. christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just:
 there's none but i have interest in the same.
 faustus. o, what art thou that look'st so terribly?
 lucifer. i am lucifer,
 and this is my companion-prince in hell.
 faustus. o faustus, they are come to fetch thy soul!
 belzebub. we are come to tell thee thou dost injure us.
 lucifer. thou call'st of christ, contrary to thy promise.
 belzebub. thou shouldst not think on god.
 lucifer. think of the devil.
 belzebub. and his dam too.
 faustus. nor will faustus henceforth: pardon him for this,
 and faustus vows never to look to heaven.
 lucifer. so shalt thou shew thyself an obedient servant,
 and we will highly gratify thee for it.
 belzebub. faustus, we are come from hell in person to shew thee
 some pastime: sit down, and thou shalt behold the seven deadly
 sins appear to thee in their own proper shapes and likeness.
 faustus. that sight will be as pleasant unto me,
 as paradise was to adam the first day
 of his creation.
 lucifer. talk not of paradise or creation; but mark the show.—
 go, mephistophilis, and  fetch them in.
 mephistophilis brings in the seven deadly sins.
 belzebub. now, faustus, question them of their names and
 dispositions.
 faustus. that shall i soon.—what art thou, the  first?
 pride. i am pride. i disdain to have any parents. i am like to
 ovid's flea; i can creep into every corner of a wench; sometimes,
 like a perriwig, i sit upon her brow; next, like a necklace, i hang
 about her neck; then, like a fan of feathers, i kiss her lips; 
 and then, turning myself to a wrought smock, do what i list.
 but, fie, what a smell is here! i'll not speak a word more for
 a king's ransom, unless the ground be perfumed, and covered with
 cloth of arras.
 faustus. thou art a proud knave, indeed.—what art thou, the second?
 covetousness. i am covetousness, begotten of an old churl, in a
 leather bag: and, might i now obtain my wish, this house, you,
 and all, should turn to gold, that i might lock you safe into
 my chest: o my sweet gold!
 faustus. and what art thou, the third?
 envy. i am envy, begotten of a chimney-sweeper and an oyster-wife.
 i cannot read, and therefore wish all books burned. i am lean
 with seeing others eat. o, that there would come a famine over
 all the world, that all might die, and i live alone! then thou
 shouldst see how fat i'd be. but must thou sit, and i stand?
 come down, with a vengeance!
 faustus. out, envious wretch!—but what art thou, the fourth?
 wrath. i am wrath. i had neither father nor mother: i leapt
 out of a lion's mouth when i was scarce an hour old; and ever
 since have run  up and down the world with this  case of
 rapiers, wounding myself when i could get none to fight withal.
 i was born in hell; and look to it, for some of you shall be my
 father.
 faustus. and what art thou, the fifth?
 gluttony. i am gluttony. my parents are all dead, and the devil
 a penny they have left me, but a small pension, and that buys me
 thirty meals a-day and ten bevers,—a small trifle to suffice
 nature. i come  of a royal pedigree: my father was a gammon
 of bacon, my mother was a hogshead of claret-wine; my godfathers
 were these, peter pickled-herring and martin martlemas-beef; but
 my godmother, o, she was an ancient gentlewoman; her name was
 margery march-beer. now, faustus, thou hast heard all my progeny;
 wilt thou bid me to supper?
 faustus. not i.
 gluttony. then the devil choke thee!
 faustus. choke thyself, glutton!—what art thou, the sixth?
 sloth. heigho! i am sloth. i was begotten on a sunny bank.
 heigho! i'll not speak a word more for a king's ransom.
 faustus. and what are you, mistress minx, the seventh and last?
 lechery. who, i,  sir? i am one that loves an inch of raw
 mutton better than an ell of fried stock-fish; and the first
 letter of my name begins with l. 
 lucifer. away to hell, away! on, piper!
 [exeunt the sins.]
 faustus. o, how this sight doth delight my soul!
 lucifer. tut,  faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.
 faustus. o, might i see hell, and return again safe,
 how happy were i then!
 lucifer. faustus, thou shalt; at midnight i will send for thee.
 meanwhile peruse this book and view it throughly,
 and thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt.
 faustus. thanks, mighty lucifer!
 this will i keep as chary as my life.
 lucifer. now, faustus, farewell.
 faustus. farewell, great lucifer.
 [exeunt lucifer and belzebub.]
 come, mephistophilis.
 [exeunt.]
 enter robin,  with a book.
 robin. what, dick! look to the horses there, till i come again.
 i have gotten one of doctor faustus' conjuring-books; and now
 we'll have such knavery as't passes.
 enter dick.
 dick. what, robin! you must come away and walk the horses.
 robin. i walk the horses! i scorn't, faith:  i have other
 matters in hand: let the horses walk themselves, an they will.—
 [reads.]
 a per se, a; t, h, e, the; o per se, o; demy orgon gorgon.—
 keep further from me, o thou illiterate and unlearned hostler!
 dick. 'snails, what hast thou got there? a book! why, thou canst
 not tell  ne'er a word on't.
 robin. that thou shalt see presently: keep out of the circle,
 i say, lest i send you into the ostry with a vengeance.
 dick. that's like, faith! you had best leave your foolery; for,
 an my master come, he'll conjure you, faith.
 robin. my master conjure me! i'll tell thee what; an my master
 come here, i'll clap as fair a  pair of horns on's head as
 e'er thou sawest in thy life.
 dick. thou need'st  not do that, for my mistress hath done it.
 robin. ay, there be of us here that have waded as deep into
 matters as other men, if they were disposed to talk.
 dick. a plague take you! i thought you did not sneak up and down
 after her for nothing. but, i prithee, tell me in good sadness,
 robin, is that a conjuring-book?
 robin. do but speak what thou'lt have me to do, and i'll do't:
 if thou'lt dance naked, put off thy clothes, and i'll conjure
 thee about presently; or, if thou'lt go but to the tavern with
 me, i'll give thee white wine, red wine, claret-wine, sack,
 muscadine, malmsey, and whippincrust, hold, belly, hold;  and
 we'll not pay one penny for it.
 dick. o, brave! prithee,  let's to it presently, for i am as
 dry as a dog.
 robin. come, then, let's away.
 [exeunt.]
 enter chorus.
 chorus. learned faustus,
 to find the secrets of astronomy
 graven in the book of jove's high firmament,
 did mount him  up to scale olympus' top;
 where, sitting in a chariot burning bright,
 drawn by the strength of yoked dragons' necks,
 he views  the clouds, the planets, and the stars,
 the tropic zones, and quarters of the sky,
 from the bright circle of the horned moon
 even to the height of primum mobile;
 and, whirling round with this  circumference,
 within the concave compass of the pole,
 from east to west his dragons swiftly glide,
 and in eight days did bring him home again.
 not long he stay'd within his quiet house,
 to rest his bones after his weary toil;
 but new exploits do hale him out again:
 and, mounted then upon a dragon's back,
 that with his wings did part the subtle air,
 he now is gone to prove cosmography,
 that measures coasts and kingdoms of the earth;
 and, as i guess, will first arrive at rome,
 to see the pope and manner of his court,
 and take some part of holy peter's feast,
 the which this day is highly solemniz'd.
 [exit.]
 enter faustus and mephistophilis.
 faustus. having now, my good mephistophilis,
 pass'd with delight the stately town of trier,
 environ'd round  with airy mountain-tops,
 with walls of flint, and deep-entrenched lakes,
 not to be won by any conquering prince;
 from paris next, coasting the realm of france,
 we saw the river maine fall into rhine, 
 whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines;
 then up to  naples, rich campania,
 whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,
 the streets straight forth, and pav'd with finest brick,
 quarter the town in four equivalents: 
 there saw we learned maro's golden tomb;
 the way he cut, an english mile in length,
 thorough  a rock of stone, in one night's space;
 from thence to venice, padua, and the rest, 
 in one of which a sumptuous temple stands,
 that threats the stars with her aspiring top,
 whose frame is pav'd with sundry-colour'd stones,
 and roof'd aloft with curious work in gold.
 thus hitherto hath faustus spent his time:
 but tell me  now, what resting-place is this?
 hast thou, as erst i did command,
 conducted me within the walls of rome?
 mephist. i have, my faustus; and, for proof thereof,
 this is the goodly palace of the pope;
 and, 'cause we are no common guests,
 i choose his privy-chamber for our use.
 faustus. i hope his holiness will bid us  welcome.
 mephist. all's one, for we'll be bold with his venison.
 but now, my faustus, that thou mayst perceive
 what rome contains for to delight thine eyes,
 know that this city stands upon seven hills
 that underprop the groundwork of the same:
 just through  the midst runs flowing tiber's stream,
 with winding banks that cut it in two parts;
 over the which two stately bridges lean,
 that make safe passage to each part of rome:
 upon the bridge call'd ponte  angelo
 erected is a castle passing strong,
 where thou shalt see such store of ordnance,
 as that the double cannons, forg'd of brass,
 do match  the number of the days contain'd
 within the compass of one complete year;
 beside the gates, and high pyramides,
 that julius caesar brought from africa.
 faustus. now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
 of styx, of acheron, and the fiery lake
 of ever-burning phlegethon, i swear
 that i do long to see the  monuments
 and situation of bright-splendent rome:
 come, therefore, let's away.
 mephist. nay, stay, my faustus: i know you'd see the pope,
 and take some part of holy peter's feast,
 the which, in state and  high solemnity,
 this day, is held through rome and italy,
 in honour of the pope's triumphant victory.
 faustus. sweet mephistophilis, thou pleasest me.
 whilst i am here on earth, let me be cloy'd
 with all things that delight the heart of man:
 my four-and-twenty years of liberty
 i'll spend in pleasure and in dalliance,
 that faustus' name, whilst  this bright frame doth stand,
 may be admir'd thorough  the furthest land.
 mephist. 'tis well said, faustus. come, then, stand by me,
 and thou shalt see them come immediately.
 faustus. nay, stay, my gentle mephistophilis,
 and grant me my  request, and then i go.
 thou know'st, within the compass of eight days
 we view'd the face of heaven, of earth, and hell;
 so high our dragons soar'd into the air,
 that, looking down, the earth appear'd to me
 no bigger than my hand in quantity;
 there did we view the kingdoms of the world,
 and what might please mine eye i there beheld.
 then in this show let me an actor be,
 that this proud pope may faustus' cunning  see.
 mephist. let it be so, my faustus. but, first, stay,
 and view their triumphs as they pass this way;
 and then devise what best contents thy mind,
 by cunning in thine art to cross the pope,
 or dash the pride of this  solemnity;
 to make his monks and abbots stand like apes,
 and point like antics at  his triple crown;
 to beat the beads about the friars' pates,
 or clap huge horns upon the cardinals' heads;
 or any villany thou canst devise;
 and i'll perform it,  faustus. hark! they come:
 this day shall make thee be admir'd in rome.
 enter the cardinals and bishops, some bearing crosiers, some
 the pillars; monks and friars, singing their procession;
 then the pope, raymond king of hungary, the archbishop
 of rheims, bruno led in chains, and attendants.
 pope. cast down our footstool.
 raymond. saxon bruno, stoop,
 whilst on thy back his holiness ascends
 saint peter's chair and state pontifical.
 bruno. proud lucifer, that state belongs to me;
 but thus i fall to peter, not to thee.
 pope. to me and peter shalt thou grovelling lie,
 and crouch before the papal dignity.—
 sound trumpets, then; for thus saint peter's heir,
 from bruno's back, ascends saint peter's chair.
 [a flourish while he ascends.]
 thus, as the gods creep on with feet of wool,
 long ere with iron hands they punish men,
 so shall our sleeping vengeance now arise,
 and smite with death thy hated enterprise. —
 lord cardinals of france and padua,
 go forthwith to our  holy consistory,
 and read, amongst the statutes decretal,
 what, by the holy council held at trent,
 the sacred synod hath decreed for him
 that doth assume the papal government
 without election and a true consent:
 away, and bring us word with speed.
 cardinal of france. we go, my lord.
 [exeunt cardinals of france and padua.]
 pope. lord raymond.
 [they converse in dumb show.]
 faustus. go, haste thee, gentle mephistophilis,
 follow the cardinals to the consistory;
 and, as they turn their superstitious books,
 strike them with sloth and drowsy idleness,
 and make them sleep so sound, that in their shapes
 thyself and i may parley with this  pope,
 this proud confronter of the emperor;
 and, in despite of all his holiness,
 restore this bruno to his liberty,
 and bear him to the states of germany.
 mephist. faustus, i go.
 faustus. despatch it soon:
 the pope shall curse, that faustus came to rome.
 [exeunt faustus and mephistophilis.]
 bruno. pope adrian, let me have right  of law:
 i was elected by the emperor.
 pope. we will depose the emperor for that deed,
 and curse the people that submit to him:
 both he and thou shall  stand excommunicate,
 and interdict from church's privilege
 and all society of holy men.
 he grows too proud in his authority,
 lifting his lofty head above the clouds,
 and, like a steeple, overpeers the church:
 but we'll pull down his haughty insolence;
 and, as pope alexander, our progenitor,
 trod on the neck of german frederick,
 adding this golden sentence to our praise,
 "that peter's heirs should tread on emperors,
 and walk upon the dreadful adder's back,
 treading the lion and the dragon down,
 and fearless spurn the killing basilisk,"
 so will we quell that haughty schismatic,
 and, by authority apostolical,
 depose him from his regal government.
 bruno. pope julius swore to princely sigismond,
 for him and the succeeding popes of rome,
 to hold the emperors their lawful lords.
 pope. pope julius did abuse the church's rights,
 and therefore none of his decrees can stand.
 is not all power on earth bestow'd on us?
 and therefore, though we would, we cannot err.
 behold this silver belt, whereto is fix'd
 seven golden seals, fast sealed with seven seals,
 in token of our seven-fold power from heaven,
 to bind or loose, lock fast, condemn or judge,
 resign or seal, or what so pleaseth us:
 then he and thou, and all the world, shall stoop,
 or be assured of our dreadful curse,
 to light as heavy as the pains of hell.
 re-enter faustus and mephistophilis, in the shapes of the
 cardinals of france and padua.
 mephist. now tell me, faustus, are we not fitted well?
 faustus. yes, mephistophilis; and two such cardinals
 ne'er serv'd a holy pope as we shall do.
 but, whilst they sleep within the consistory,
 let us salute his reverend fatherhood.
 raymond. behold, my lord, the cardinals are return'd.
 pope. welcome, grave fathers: answer presently
 what hath  our holy council there decreed
 concerning bruno and the emperor,
 in quittance of their late conspiracy
 against our state and papal dignity?
 faustus. most sacred patron of the church of rome,
 by full consent of all the synod 
 of priests and prelates, it is thus decreed,—
 that bruno and the german emperor
 be held as lollards and bold schismatics,
 and proud disturbers of the church's peace;
 and if that bruno, by his own assent,
 without enforcement of the german peers,
 did seek to wear the triple diadem,
 and by your death to climb saint peter's chair,
 the statutes decretal have thus decreed,—
 he shall be straight condemn'd of heresy,
 and on a pile of faggots burnt to death.
 pope. it is enough. here, take him to your charge,
 and bear him straight to ponte  angelo,
 and in the strongest tower enclose him fast.
 to-morrow, sitting in our consistory,
 with all our college of grave cardinals,
 we will determine of his life or death.
 here, take his  triple crown along with you,
 and leave it in the church's treasury.
 make haste again, my good lord cardinals,
 and take our blessing apostolical.
 mephist. so, so; was never devil thus bless'd before.
 faustus. away, sweet mephistophilis, be gone;
 the cardinals will be plagu'd for this anon.
 [exeunt faustus and mephistophilis with bruno.]
 pope. go presently and bring a banquet forth,
 that we may solemnize saint peter's feast,
 and with lord raymond, king of hungary,
 drink to our late and happy victory.
 a sennet  while the banquet is brought in; and then enter
 faustus and mephistophilis in their own shapes.
 mephist. now, faustus, come, prepare thyself for mirth:
 the sleepy cardinals are hard at hand,
 to censure bruno, that is posted hence,
 and on a proud-pac'd steed, as swift as thought,
 flies o'er the alps to fruitful germany,
 there to salute the woful emperor.
 faustus. the pope will curse them for their sloth to-day,
 that slept both bruno and his crown away.
 but now, that faustus may delight his mind,
 and by their folly make some merriment,
 sweet mephistophilis, so charm me here,
 that i may walk invisible to all,
 and do whate'er i please, unseen of any.
 mephist. faustus, thou shalt: then kneel down presently,
 whilst on thy head i lay my hand,
 and charm thee with this magic wand.
 first, wear this girdle; then appear
 invisible to all are here:
 the planets seven, the gloomy air,
 hell, and the furies' forked hair,
 pluto's blue fire, and hecat's tree,
 with magic spells so compass thee,
 that no eye may thy body see!
 so, faustus, now, for all their holiness,
 do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discern'd.
 faustus. thanks, mephistophilis.—now, friars, take heed,
 lest faustus make your shaven crowns to bleed.
 mephist. faustus, no more: see, where the cardinals come!
 re-enter the cardinals of france and padua with a book.
 pope. welcome, lord cardinals; come, sit down.—
 lord raymond, take your seat.—friars, attend,
 and see that all things be  in readiness,
 as best beseems this solemn festival.
 cardinal of france. first, may it please your sacred holiness
 to view the sentence of the reverend synod
 concerning bruno and the emperor?
 pope. what needs this question? did i not tell you,
 to-morrow we would sit i' the consistory,
 and there determine of his punishment?
 you brought us word even now, it was decreed
 that bruno and the cursed emperor
 were by the holy council both condemn'd
 for loathed lollards and base schismatics:
 then wherefore would you have me view that book?
 cardinal of france. your grace mistakes; you gave us no such charge.
 raymond. deny it not; we all are witnesses
 that bruno here was late deliver'd you,
 with his rich triple crown to be reserv'd
 and put into the church's treasury.
 both cardinals. by holy paul, we saw them not!
 pope. by peter, you shall die,
 unless you bring them forth immediately!—
 hale them to  prison, lade their limbs with gyves.—
 false prelates, for this hateful treachery
 curs'd be your souls to hellish misery!
 [exeunt attendants with the two cardinals.]
 faustus. so, they are safe. now, faustus, to the feast:
 the pope had never such a frolic guest.
 pope. lord archbishop of rheims, sit down with us.
 archbishop.  i thank your holiness.
 faustus. fall to; the devil choke you,  an you spare!
 pope. who is that spoke?—friars, look about.—
 lord raymond, pray, fall to. i am beholding 
 to the bishop of milan for this so rare a present.
 faustus. i thank you, sir.
 [snatches the dish.]
 pope. how now! who snatch'd the meat from me?
 villains, why speak you not?—
 my good lord archbishop, here's a most dainty dish
 was sent me from a cardinal in france.
 faustus. i'll have that too.
 [snatches the dish.]
 pope. what lollards do attend our holiness,
 that we receive such  great indignity?
 fetch me some wine.
 faustus. ay, pray, do, for faustus is a-dry.
 pope. lord raymond,
 i drink unto your grace.
 faustus. i pledge your grace.
 [snatches the cup.]
 pope. my wine gone too!—ye lubbers, look about,
 and find the man that doth this villany,
 or, by our sanctitude, you all shall die!—
 i pray, my lords, have patience at this
 troublesome banquet.
 archbishop. please it  your holiness, i think it be some ghost
 crept out of purgatory, and now is come unto your holiness for his
 pardon.
 pope. it may be so.—
 go, then, command our priests to sing a dirge,
 to lay the fury of this same troublesome ghost.
 [exit an attendant.—the pope crosses himself.]
 faustus. how now! must every bit be spic'd with a cross?—
 nay, then, take that.
 [strikes the pope.]
 pope. o, i am slain!—help me, my lords!
 o, come and help to bear my body hence!—
 damn'd be his  soul for ever for this deed!
 [exeunt all except faustus and mephistophilis.]
 mephist. now, faustus, what will you do now? for i can tell you
 you'll be cursed with bell, book, and candle.
 faustus. bell, book, and candle,—candle, book, and bell,—
 forward and backward, to curse faustus to hell!
 re-enter the friars, with bell, book, and candle, for the
 dirge.
 first friar. come, brethren, lets about our business with good
 devotion.
 [they sing.]
 maledicat dominus!
 face! maledicat dominus!
 maledicat dominus!
 cursed be he that disturbeth our holy dirge! maledicat
 dominus!
 cursed be he that took away his holiness' wine! maledicat
 dominus!
 [mephistophilis and faustus beat the friars, and fling
 fire-works among them, and exeunt.]
 enter robin and dick with a cup.
 dick. sirrah robin, we were best look that your devil can answer
 the stealing of this same  cup, for the vintner's boy follows
 us at the hard heels. 
 robin. 'tis no matter; let him come: an he follow us, i'll so
 conjure him as he was never conjured in his life, i warrant him.
 let me see the cup.
 dick. here 'tis.
 [gives the cup to robin.]
 yonder he comes: now, robin, now or never shew thy cunning.
 enter vintner. 
 vintner. o, are you here? i am glad i have found you. you are
 a couple of fine companions: pray, where's the cup you stole
 from the tavern?
 robin. how, how! we steal a cup! take heed what you say: we look
 not like cup-stealers, i can tell you.
 vintner. never deny't, for i know you have it; and i'll search you.
 robin. search me! ay, and spare not.
 —hold the cup, dick [aside to dick, giving him the cup].—
 come, come, search me, search me.
 [vintner searches him.]
 vintner. come on, sirrah, let me search you now.
 dick. ay, ay, do, do.
 —hold the cup, robin [aside to robin, giving him the cup].—
 i fear not your searching: we scorn to steal your  cups,
 i can tell you.
 [vintner searches him.]
 vintner. never out-face me for the matter; for, sure, the cup
 is between you two.
 robin. nay, there you lie; 'tis beyond us both.
 vintner. a plague take you! i thought 'twas your knavery to take
 it away: come, give it me again.
 robin. ay, much!  when, can you tell?—dick, make me a circle,
 and stand close at my back, and stir not for thy life.—vintner,
 you shall have your cup anon.—say nothing, dick.—[reads from
 a book] o per se, o; demogorgon; belcher, and mephistophilis!
 enter mephistophilis.
 mephist. you princely legions of infernal rule,
 how am i vexed by these villains' charms!
 from constantinople have they brought me now,
 only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
 [exit vintner.]
 robin. by lady,  sir, you have had a shrewd journey of it!
 will it please you to  take a shoulder of mutton to supper,
 and a tester  in your purse, and go back again?
 dick. ay, i pray you heartily, sir; for we called you but in jest,
 i promise you.
 mephist. to purge the rashness of this cursed deed,
 first, be thou turned to this ugly shape,
 for apish deeds transformed to an ape.
 robin. o, brave! an ape! i pray, sir, let me have the carrying
 of him about, to shew some tricks.
 mephist. and so thou shalt: be thou transformed to a dog, and
 carry him upon thy back. away! be gone!
 robin. a dog! that's excellent: let the maids look well to their
 porridge-pots, for i'll into the kitchen presently.—come, dick,
 come.
 [exeunt robin and dick.]
 mephist. now with the flames of ever-burning fire
 i'll wing myself, and forthwith fly amain(sic)
 unto my faustus, to the great turk's court.
 [exit.]
 enter martino and frederick at several doors.
 martino. what, ho, officers, gentlemen!
 hie to the presence to attend the emperor.—
 good frederick, see the rooms be voided straight:
 his majesty is coming to the hall;
 go back, and see the state  in readiness.
 frederick. but where is bruno, our elected pope,
 that on a fury's back came post from rome?
 will not his grace consort the emperor?
 martino. o, yes; and with him comes the german conjurer,
 the learned faustus, fame of wittenberg,
 the wonder of the world for magic art;
 and he intends to shew great carolus
 the race of all his stout progenitors,
 and bring in presence of his majesty
 the royal shapes and perfect  semblances
 of alexander and his beauteous paramour.
 frederick. where is benvolio?
 martino. fast asleep, i warrant you;
 he took his rouse  with stoops of rhenish wine
 so kindly yesternight to bruno's health,
 that all this day the sluggard keeps his bed.
 frederick. see, see, his window's ope! we'll call to him.
 martino. what, ho! benvolio!
 enter benvolio above, at a window, in his nightcap, buttoning.
 benvolio. what a devil ail you two?
 martino. speak softly, sir, lest the devil hear you;
 for faustus at the court is late arriv'd,
 and at his heels a  thousand furies wait,
 to accomplish whatsoe'er the doctor please.
 benvolio. what of this?
 martino. come, leave thy chamber first, and thou shalt see
 this conjurer perform such rare exploits,
 before the pope and royal emperor,
 as never yet was seen in germany.
 benvolio. has not the pope enough of conjuring yet?
 he was upon the devil's back late enough:
 an if he be so far in love with him,
 i would he would post with him to rome again!
 frederick. speak, wilt thou come and see this sport?
 benvolio. not i.
 martino. wilt thou stand in thy window, and see it, then?
 benvolio. ay, an i fall not asleep i' the mean time.
 martino. the emperor is at hand, who comes to see
 what wonders by black spells may compass'd be.
 benvolio. well, go you attend the emperor. i am content, for
 this once, to thrust my head out at a  window; for they
 say, if a man be drunk over night, the devil cannot hurt him
 in the morning: if that be true, i have a charm in my head,
 shall control him as well as the conjurer, i warrant you.
 [exeunt frederick and martino.]
 a sennet. enter charles the german emperor, bruno,
 martino, and attendants.
 emperor. wonder of men, renowm'd  magician,
 thrice-learned faustus, welcome to our court.
 this deed of thine, in setting bruno free
 from his and our professed enemy,
 shall add more excellence unto thine art
 than if by powerful necromantic spells
 thou couldst command the world's obedience:
 for ever be belov'd of carolus!
 and if this bruno, thou hast late redeem'd,
 in peace possess the triple diadem,
 and sit in peter's chair, despite of chance,
 thou shalt be famous through  all italy,
 and honour'd of the german emperor.
 faustus. these  gracious words, most royal carolus,
 shall make poor faustus, to his utmost power,
 both love and serve the german emperor,
 and lay his life at holy bruno's feet:
 for proof whereof, if so your grace be pleas'd,
 the doctor stands prepar'd by power of art
 to cast his magic charms, that shall pierce through 
 the ebon gates of ever-burning hell,
 and hale the stubborn furies from their caves,
 to compass whatsoe'er your grace commands.
 benvolio. blood, he speaks terribly! but, for all that, i do not
 greatly believe him: he looks as like a  conjurer as the pope
 to a costermonger. [aside.]
 emperor. then, faustus, as thou late didst promise us,
 we would behold that famous conqueror,
 great alexander, and his paramour,
 in their true shapes and state majestical,
 that we may wonder at their excellence.
 faustus. your majesty shall see them presently.—
 mephistophilis, away,
 and, with a solemn noise of trumpets' sound,
 present before this  royal emperor
 great alexander and his beauteous paramour.
 mephist. faustus, i will.
 [exit.]
 benvolio. well, master doctor, an your devils come not away
 quickly, you shall have me asleep presently: zounds, i could
 eat myself for anger, to think i have been such an ass all this
 while, to stand gaping after the devil's governor, and can see
 nothing!
 i'll make you feel something anon, if my art fail me not.—
 my lord, i must forewarn your majesty,
 that, when my spirits present the royal shapes
 of alexander and his paramour,
 your grace demand  no questions of the king,
 but in dumb silence let them come and go.
 emperor. be it as faustus please; we are content.
 benvolio. ay, ay, and i am content too: an thou bring alexander
 and his paramour before the emperor, i'll be actaeon, and turn
 myself to a stag.
 faustus. and i'll play diana, and send you the horns presently.
 sennet. enter, at one door,  the emperor alexander, at
 the other, darius. they meet. darius is thrown down;
 alexander kills him, takes off his crown, and, offering to
 go out, his paramour meets him. he embraceth her, and sets
 darius' crown upon her head; and, coming back, both salute
 the emperor, who, leaving his state,  offers to embrace
 them; which faustus seeing, suddenly stays him. then trumpets
 cease, and music sounds.
 my gracious lord, you do forget yourself;
 these  are but shadows, not substantial.
 emperor. o, pardon me! my thoughts are so ravish'd
 with sight of this renowmed  emperor,
 that in mine arms i would have compass'd him.
 but, faustus, since i may not speak to them,
 to satisfy my longing thoughts  at full,
 let me this tell thee: i have heard it said
 that this fair lady, whilst  she liv'd on earth,
 had on her neck a little wart or mole;
 how may i prove that saying to be true?
 faustus. your majesty may boldly go and see.
 emperor. faustus, i see it plain;
 and in this sight thou better pleasest me
 than if i gain'd  another monarchy.
 faustus. away! be gone! [exit show.]—see, see, my gracious
 lord! what strange beast is yon, that thrusts his head out at
 window? 
 emperor. o, wondrous sight!—see, duke of saxony,
 two spreading horns most strangely fastened
 upon the head of young benvolio!
 saxony. what, is he asleep or dead?
 faustus. he sleeps, my lord; but dreams not of his horns.
 emperor. this sport is excellent: we'll call and wake him.—
 what, ho, benvolio!
 benvolio. a plague upon you! let me sleep a while.
 emperor. i blame thee not to sleep much, having such a head of
 thine own.
 saxony. look up, benvolio; 'tis the emperor calls.
 benvolio. the emperor! where?—o, zounds, my head!
 emperor. nay, an thy horns hold, 'tis no matter for thy head,
 for that's armed sufficiently.
 faustus. why, how now, sir knight! what, hanged by the horns!
 this is  most horrible: fie, fie, pull in your head, for
 shame! let not all the world wonder at you.
 benvolio. zounds, doctor, this is  your villany!
 faustus. o, say not so, sir! the doctor has no skill,
 no art, no cunning, to present these lords,
 or bring before this royal emperor
 the mighty monarch, warlike alexander.
 if faustus do it, you are straight resolv'd,
 in bold actaeon's shape, to turn a stag:—
 and therefore, my lord, so please your majesty,
 i'll raise a kennel of hounds shall hunt him so
 as  all his footmanship shall scarce prevail
 to keep his carcass from their bloody fangs.—
 ho, belimoth, argiron, asteroth! 
 benvolio. hold, hold!—zounds, he'll raise up a kennel of devils,
 i think, anon.—good my lord, entreat for me.—'sblood, i am never
 able to endure these torments.
 emperor. then, good master doctor,
 let me entreat you to remove his horns;
 he has  done penance now sufficiently.
 faustus. my gracious lord, not so much for injury done to me,
 as to delight your majesty with some mirth, hath faustus justly
 requited this injurious knight; which being all i desire, i am
 content to remove his horns. —mephistophilis, transform him
 [mephistophilis removes the horns]:—and hereafter, sir, 
 look you speak well of scholars.
 benvolio. speak well of ye! 'sblood, an scholars be such
 cuckold-makers, to clap horns of  honest men's heads o' this
 order, i'll ne'er trust smooth faces and small ruffs more.—but,
 an i be not revenged for this, would i might be turned to a
 gaping oyster, and drink nothing but salt water!
 [aside, and then exit above.]
 emperor. come, faustus: while the emperor lives,
 in recompense of this thy high desert,
 thou shalt command the state of germany,
 and live belov'd of mighty carolus.
 [exeunt.]
 enter benvolio, martino, frederick, and soldiers.
 martino. nay, sweet benvolio, let us sway  thy thoughts
 from this attempt against the conjurer. 
 benvolio. away! you love me not, to urge me thus:
 shall i let slip so great an injury,
 when every servile groom jests at my wrongs,
 and in their rustic gambols proudly say,
 "benvolio's head was grac'd with horns today?"
 o, may these eyelids never close again,
 till with my sword i have that  conjurer slain!
 if you will aid me in this enterprise,
 then draw your weapons and be resolute;
 if not, depart: here will benvolio die,
 but faustus' death shall quit my  infamy.
 frederick. nay, we will stay with thee, betide what may,
 and kill that  doctor, if he come this way.
 benvolio. then, gentle frederick, hie thee to the grove,
 and place our servants and our followers
 close in an  ambush there behind the trees.
 by this, i know the conjurer is near:
 i saw him kneel, and kiss the emperor's hand,
 and take his leave, laden with rich rewards.
 then, soldiers, boldly  fight: if faustus die,
 take you the wealth, leave us the victory.
 frederick. come, soldiers, follow me unto the grove:
 who kills him shall have gold and endless love.
 [exit frederick with soldiers.]
 benvolio. my head is lighter, than it was, by the horns;
 but yet my heart's  more ponderous than my head,
 and pants until i see that  conjurer dead.
 martino. where shall we place ourselves, benvolio?
 benvolio. here will we stay to bide the first assault:
 o, were that damned hell-hound but in place,
 thou soon shouldst see me quit my foul disgrace!
 re-enter frederick.
 frederick. close, close! the conjurer is at hand,
 and all alone comes walking in his gown;
 be ready, then, and strike the  peasant down.
 benvolio. mine be that honour, then. now, sword, strike home!
 for horns he gave i'll have his head anon.
 martino. see, see, he comes!
 enter faustus with a false head.
 benvolio. no words. this blow ends all:
 hell take his soul! his body thus must fall.
 [stabs faustus.]
 faustus. [falling.] o!
 frederick. groan you, master doctor?
 benvolio. break may his heart with groans!—dear frederick, see,
 thus will i end his griefs immediately.
 martino. strike with a willing hand.
 [benvolio strikes off faustus' head.]
 his head is off.
 benvolio. the devil's dead; the furies now  may laugh.
 frederick. was this that stern aspect, that awful frown,
 made the grim monarch of infernal spirits
 tremble and quake at his commanding charms?
 martino. was this that damned head, whose art  conspir'd
 benvolio's shame before the emperor?
 benvolio. ay, that's the head, and there  the body lies,
 justly rewarded for his villanies.
 frederick. come, let's devise how we may add more shame
 to the black scandal of his hated name.
 benvolio. first, on his head, in quittance of my wrongs,
 i'll nail huge forked horns, and let them hang
 within the window where he yok'd me first,
 that all the world may see my just revenge.
 martino. what use shall we put his beard to?
 benvolio. we'll sell it to a chimney-sweeper: it will wear out
 ten birchen brooms, i warrant you.
 frederick. what shall his  eyes do?
 benvolio. we'll pull  out his eyes; and they shall serve for
 buttons to his lips, to keep his tongue from catching cold.
 martino. an excellent policy! and now, sirs, having divided him,
 what shall the body do?
 [faustus rises.]
 benvolio. zounds, the devil's alive again!
 frederick. give him his head, for god's sake.
 faustus. nay, keep it: faustus will have heads and hands,
 ay, all  your hearts to recompense this deed.
 knew you not, traitors, i was limited
 for four-and-twenty years to breathe on earth?
 and, had you cut my body with your swords,
 or hew'd this flesh and bones as small as sand,
 yet in a minute had my spirit return'd,
 and i had breath'd a man, made free from harm.
 but wherefore do i dally my revenge?—
 asteroth, belimoth, mephistophilis?
 enter mephistophilis, and other devils.
 go, horse these traitors on your fiery backs,
 and mount aloft with them as high as heaven:
 thence pitch them headlong to the lowest hell.
 yet, stay: the world shall see their misery,
 and hell shall after plague their treachery.
 go, belimoth, and take this caitiff hence,
 and hurl him in some lake of mud and dirt.
 take thou this other, drag him through  the woods
 amongst  the pricking thorns and sharpest briers;
 whilst, with my gentle mephistophilis,
 this traitor flies unto some steepy rock,
 that, rolling down, may break the villain's bones,
 as he intended to dismember me.
 fly hence; despatch my charge immediately.
 frederick. pity us, gentle faustus! save our lives!
 faustus. away!
 frederick. he must needs go that the devil drives.
 [exeunt mephistophilis and devils with benvolio, martino,
 and frederick.]
 enter the ambushed soldiers. 
 first soldier. come, sirs, prepare yourselves in readiness;
 make haste to help these noble gentlemen:
 i heard them parley with the conjurer.
 second soldier. see, where he comes! despatch and kill the slave.
 faustus. what's here? an ambush to betray my life!
 then, faustus, try thy skill.—base peasants, stand!
 for, lo, these  trees remove at my command,
 and stand as bulwarks 'twixt yourselves and me,
 to shield me from your hated treachery!
 yet, to encounter this your weak attempt,
 behold, an army comes incontinent!
 faustus strikes the door,  and enter a devil playing
 on a drum; after him another, bearing an ensign; and divers
 with weapons; mephistophilis with fire-works. they set upon
 the soldiers, drive them out, and exeunt.
 enter, at several doors, benvolio, frederick, and martino,
 their heads and faces bloody, and besmeared with mud and
 dirt; all having horns on their heads.
 martino. what, ho, benvolio!
 benvolio. here.—what, frederick, ho!
 frederick. o, help me, gentle friend!—where is martino?
 martino. dear frederick, here,
 half smother'd in a lake of mud and dirt,
 through which the furies dragg'd me by the heels.
 frederick. martino, see, benvolio's horns again!
 martino. o, misery!—how now, benvolio!
 benvolio. defend me, heaven! shall i be haunted still?
 martino. nay, fear not, man; we have no power to kill.
 benvolio. my friends transformed thus! o, hellish spite!
 your heads are all set with horns.
 frederick. you hit it right;
 it is your own you mean; feel on your head.
 benvolio. zounds,  horns again!
 martino. nay, chafe not, man; we all are  sped.
 benvolio. what devil attends this damn'd magician,
 that, spite of spite, our wrongs are doubled?
 frederick. what may we do, that we may hide our shames?
 benvolio. if we should follow him to work revenge,
 he'd join long asses' ears to these huge horns,
 and make us laughing-stocks to all the world.
 martino. what shall we, then, do, dear benvolio?
 benvolio. i have a castle joining near these woods;
 and thither we'll repair, and live obscure,
 till time shall alter these  our brutish shapes:
 sith black disgrace hath thus eclips'd our fame,
 we'll rather die with grief than live with shame.
 [exeunt.]
 enter faustus, a horse-courser, and mephistophilis.
 horse-courser. i beseech your worship, accept of these forty dollars.
 faustus. friend, thou canst not buy so good a horse for so small
 a price. i have no great need to sell him: but, if thou likest
 him for ten dollars more, take him, because i see thou hast a
 good mind to him.
 horse-courser. i beseech you, sir, accept of this: i am a very
 poor man, and have lost very much of late by horse-flesh, and
 this bargain will set me up again.
 faustus. well, i will not stand with thee: give me the money
 [horse-courser gives faustus the money]. now, sirrah, i must
 tell you that you may ride him o'er hedge and ditch, and spare
 him not; but, do you hear? in any case, ride him not into the
 water.
 horse-courser. how, sir! not into the water! why, will he not
 drink of all waters?
 faustus. yes, he will drink of all waters; but ride him not into
 the water: o'er hedge and ditch, or where thou wilt, but not into
 the water. go, bid the hostler deliver him unto you, and remember
 what i say.
 horse-courser. i warrant you, sir!—o, joyful day! now am i a
 made man for ever.
 [exit.]
 faustus. what art thou, faustus, but a man condemn'd to die?
 thy fatal time draws to a final end;
 despair doth drive distrust into my thoughts:
 confound these passions with a quiet sleep:
 tush, christ did call the thief upon the cross;
 then rest thee, faustus, quiet in conceit.
 [he sits to sleep.]
 re-enter the horse-courser, wet.
 horse-courser. , what a cozening doctor was this! i, riding
 my horse into the water, thinking some hidden mystery had been
 in the horse, i had nothing under me but a little straw, and had
 much ado to escape  drowning. well, i'll go rouse him, and
 make him give me my forty dollars again.—ho, sirrah doctor, you
 cozening scab! master doctor, awake, and rise, and give me my
 money again, for your horse is turned to a bottle of hay, master
 doctor! [he pulls off faustus' leg]. alas, i am undone! what
 shall i do? i have pulled off his leg.
 faustus. o, help, help! the villain hath murdered me.
 horse-courser. murder or not murder, now he has  but one leg,
 i'll outrun him, and cast this leg into some ditch or other.
 [aside, and then runs out.]
 faustus. stop him, stop him, stop him!—ha, ha, ha! faustus hath
 his leg again, and the horse-courser a bundle of hay for his
 forty dollars.
 enter wagner.
 how now, wagner! what news with thee?
 wagner. if it please you, the duke of vanholt doth earnestly
 entreat your company, and hath sent some of his men to attend
 you,  with provision fit for your journey.
 faustus. the duke of vanholt's an honourable gentleman, and one
 to whom i must be no niggard of my cunning. come, away!
 [exeunt.
 enter robin, dick, the horse-courser, and a carter.
 carter. come, my masters, i'll bring you to the best beer in
 europe.—what, ho, hostess! where be these whores?
 enter hostess.
 hostess. how now! what lack you? what, my old guess!  welcome.
 robin. sirrah dick, dost thou  know why i stand so mute?
 dick. no, robin: why is't?
 robin. i am eighteen-pence on the score. but say nothing; see
 if she have forgotten me.
 hostess. who's this that stands so solemnly by himself? what,
 my old guest!
 robin. o, hostess, how do you? i hope my score stands still.
 hostess. ay, there's no doubt of that; for methinks you make no
 haste to wipe it out.
 dick. why, hostess, i say, fetch us some beer.
 hostess. you shall presently.—look up into the hall there, ho!
 [exit.—drink is presently brought in.]
 dick. come, sirs, what shall we do now  till mine hostess comes?
 carter. marry, sir,  i'll tell you the bravest tale how a
 conjurer served me. you know doctor faustus?
 horse-courser. ay, a plague take him! here's some on's have cause
 to know him. did he conjure thee too?
 carter. i'll tell you how he served me. as i was going to
 wittenberg, t'other day,  with a load of hay, he met me, and
 asked me what he should give me for as much hay as he could eat.
 now, sir, i thinking that a little would serve his turn, bad him
 take as much as he would for three farthings: so he presently
 gave me my  money and fell to eating; and, as i am a cursen 
 man, he never left eating till he had eat up all my load of hay.
 all. o, monstrous! eat a whole load of hay!
 robin. yes, yes, that may be; for i have heard of one that has eat
 a load of logs.
 horse-courser. now, sirs, you shall hear how villanously he
 served me. i went to him yesterday to buy a horse of him, and
 he would by no means sell him under forty dollars. so, sir,
 because i knew him to be such a horse as would run over hedge
 and ditch and never tire, i gave him his money. so, when i had
 my horse, doctor faustus bad me ride him night and day, and spare
 him no time; but, quoth he, in any case, ride him not into the
 water. now, sir, i thinking the horse had had some quality 
 that he would not have me know of, what did i but rid  him
 into a great river? and when i came just in the midst, my horse
 vanished away, and i sate straddling upon a bottle of hay.
 all. o, brave doctor!
 horse-courser. but you shall hear how bravely i served him for
 it. i went me home to his house, and there i found him asleep.
 i kept a hallooing and whooping in his ears; but all could not
 wake him. i, seeing that, took him by the leg, and never rested
 pulling till i had pulled me his leg quite off; and now 'tis at
 home in mine hostry.
 robin. and has the doctor but one leg, then? that's excellent;
 for one of his devils turned me into the likeness of an ape's face.
 carter. some more drink, hostess!
 robin. hark you, we'll into another room and drink a while, and
 then we'll go seek out the doctor.
 [exeunt.]
 enter the duke of vanholt, his duchess, faustus, mephistophilis,
 and attendants.
 duke. thanks, master doctor, for these pleasant sights; nor know
 i how sufficiently to recompense your great deserts in erecting
 that enchanted castle in the air,  the sight whereof so
 delighted  me as nothing in the world could please me more.
 faustus. i do think myself, my good lord, highly recompensed in
 that it pleaseth  your grace to think but well of that which
 faustus hath performed.—but, gracious lady, it may be that you
 have taken no pleasure in those sights; therefore, i pray you
 tell me, what is the thing you most desire to have; be it in the
 world, it shall be yours: i have heard that great-bellied women
 do long for things are rare and dainty.
 duchess. true, master doctor; and, since i find you so kind,
 i will make known unto you what my heart desires to have; and,
 were it now summer, as it is january, a dead time of the winter,
 i would request no better meat than a dish of ripe grapes.
 faustus. this is but a small matter.—go, mephistophilis; away!
 [exit mephistophilis.]
 madam, i will do more than this for your content.
 re-enter mephistophilis with grapes.
 here now, taste you these: they should be good, for they come 
 from a far country, i can tell you.
 duke. this makes me wonder more than all the rest, that at this
 time of the year, when every tree is barren of his fruit, from
 whence you had these ripe grapes. 
 faustus. please it your grace, the year is divided into two
 circles over the whole world; so that, when it is winter with
 us, in the contrary circle it is likewise summer with them, as
 in india, saba, and such countries that lie far east, where
 they have fruit twice a-year; from whence, by means of a swift
 spirit that i have, i had these grapes brought, as you see.
 duchess. and, trust me, they are the sweetest grapes that e'er
 i tasted.
 the clowns bounce  at the gate, within.
 duke. what rude disturbers have we at the gate?
 go, pacify their fury, set it ope,
 and then demand of them what they would have.
 [they knock again, and call out to talk with faustus.]
 servant. why, how now, masters! what a coil is there!
 what is the reason you disturb the duke?
 dick [within]. we have no reason for it; therefore a fig for him!
 servant. why, saucy varlets, dare you be so bold?
 horse-courser [within]. i hope, sir, we have wit enough to be
 more bold than welcome.
 servant. it appears so: pray, be bold elsewhere, and trouble
 not the duke.
 duke. what would they have?
 servant. they all cry out to speak with doctor faustus.
 carter [within]. ay, and we will speak with him.
 duke. will you, sir?—commit the rascals.
 dick [within]. commit with us! he were as good commit with his
 father as commit with us.
 faustus. i do beseech your grace, let them come in;
 they are good subject for  a merriment.
 duke. do as thou wilt, faustus; i give thee leave.
 faustus. i thank your grace.
 enter robin, dick, carter, and horse-courser.
 why, how now, my good friends!
 faith, you are too outrageous: but, come near;
 i have procur'd your pardons:  welcome, all.
 robin. nay, sir, we will be welcome for our money, and we will
 pay for what we take.—what, ho! give's half a dozen of beer here,
 and be hanged!
 faustus. nay, hark you; can you tell me  where you are?
 carter. ay, marry, can i; we are under heaven.
 servant. ay; but, sir saucebox, know you in what place?
 horse-courser. ay, ay, the house is good enough to drink in.
 —zouns, fill us some beer, or we'll break all the barrels in
 the house, and dash out all your brains with your bottles!
 faustus. be not so furious: come, you shall have beer.—
 my lord, beseech you give me leave a while;
 i'll gage my credit 'twill content your grace.
 duke. with all my heart, kind doctor; please thyself;
 our servants and our court's at thy command.
 faustus. i humbly thank your grace.—then fetch some beer.
 horse-courser. ay, marry, there spake  a doctor, indeed!
 and, faith, i'll drink a health to thy wooden leg for that word.
 faustus. my wooden leg! what dost thou mean by that?
 carter. ha, ha, ha!—dost hear him,  dick? he has forgot his
 leg.
 horse-courser. ay, ay, he does not stand much upon that.
 faustus. no, faith; not much upon a wooden leg.
 carter. good lord, that flesh and blood should be so frail with
 your worship! do not you remember a horse-courser you sold a
 horse to?
 faustus. yes, i remember i sold one a horse.
 carter. and do you remember you bid he should not ride him 
 into the water?
 faustus. yes, i do very well remember that.
 carter. and do you remember nothing of your leg?
 faustus. no, in good sooth.
 carter. then, i pray you,  remember your courtesy.
 faustus. i  thank you, sir.
 carter. 'tis not so much worth. i pray you, tell me one thing.
 faustus. what's that?
 carter. be both your legs bed-fellows every night together?
 faustus. wouldst thou make a colossus of me, that thou askest me
 such questions?
 carter. no, truly, sir; i would make nothing of you; but i would
 fain know that.
 enter hostess with drink.
 faustus. then, i assure thee certainly, they are.
 carter. i thank you; i am fully satisfied.
 faustus. but wherefore dost thou ask?
 carter. for nothing, sir: but methinks you should have a wooden
 bed-fellow of one of 'em.
 horse-courser. why, do you hear, sir? did not i  pull off
 one of your legs when you were asleep?
 faustus. but i have it again, now i am awake: look you here, sir.
 all. o, horrible! had the doctor three legs?
 carter. do you remember, sir, how you cozened me, and eat up my
 load of——
 [faustus, in the middle of each speech, charms them dumb.]
 dick. do you remember how you made me wear an ape's——
 horse-courser. you whoreson conjuring scab, do you remember how
 you cozened me with a ho——
 robin. ha'  you forgotten me? you think to carry it away with
 your hey-pass and re-pass: do you remember the dog's fa——
 [exeunt clowns.]
 hostess. who pays for the ale? hear you, master doctor; now you
 have sent away my guess,  i pray who shall pay me for my a——
 [exit hostess.]
 duchess. my lord,
 we are much beholding  to this learned man.
 duke. so are we, madam; which we will recompense
 with all the love and kindness that we may:
 his artful sport  drives all sad thoughts away.
 [exeunt.]
 thunder and lightning. enter devils with covered dishes;
 mephistophilis leads them into faustus's study; then enter
 wagner. i think my master  means to die shortly; he has made
 his will, and given me his wealth, his house, his goods,  and
 store of golden plate, besides two thousand ducats ready-coined.
 i wonder what he means: if death were nigh, he would not frolic
 thus. he's now at supper with the scholars, where there's such
 belly-cheer as wagner in his life ne'er  saw the like: and,
 see where they come! belike the feast is ended. 
 [exit.]
 enter faustus, mephistophilis, and two or three scholars.
 first scholar. master doctor faustus, since our conference
 about fair ladies, which was the beautifulest in all the world,
 we have determined with ourselves that helen of greece was the
 admirablest lady that ever lived: therefore, master doctor, if
 you will do us so much favour as to let us see that peerless
 dame of greece, whom all the world admires for majesty, we should
 think ourselves much beholding unto you.
 faustus. gentlemen,
 for that i know your friendship is unfeign'd,
 it is not faustus' custom to deny
 the just request of those that wish him well:
 you shall behold that peerless dame of greece,
 no otherwise for pomp or majesty
 than when sir paris cross'd the seas with her,
 and brought the spoils to rich dardania.
 be silent, then, for danger is in words.
 music sounds. mephistophilis brings in helen; she passeth
 over the stage.
 second scholar. was this fair helen, whose admired worth
 made greece with ten years' war  afflict poor troy?
 third scholar. too simple is my wit  to tell her worth,
 whom all the world admires for majesty.
 first scholar. now we have seen the pride of nature's work,
 we'll take our leaves: and, for this blessed sight,
 happy and blest be faustus evermore!
 faustus. gentlemen, farewell: the same wish i to you.
 [exeunt scholars.]
 enter an old man.
 old man. o gentle faustus, leave this damned art,
 this magic, that will charm thy soul to hell,
 and quite bereave thee of salvation!
 though thou hast now offended like a man,
 do not persever in it like a devil:
 yet, yet thou hast an amiable soul,
 if sin by custom grow not into nature;
 then, faustus, will repentance come too late;
 then thou art banish'd from the sight of heaven:
 no mortal can express the pains of hell.
 it may be, this my exhortation
 seems harsh and all unpleasant: let it not;
 for, gentle son, i speak it not in wrath,
 or envy of thee,  but in tender love,
 and pity of thy future misery;
 and so have hope that this my kind rebuke,
 checking thy body, may amend thy soul.
 faustus. where art thou, faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?
 hell claims his right, and with a roaring voice
 says, "faustus, come; thine hour is almost come;"
 and faustus now will come to do thee right.
 [mephistophilis gives him a dagger.]
 old man. o, stay, good faustus, stay thy desperate steps!
 i see an angel hover o'er thy head,
 and, with a vial full of precious grace,
 offers to pour the same into thy soul:
 then call for mercy, and avoid despair.
 faustus. o friend, i feel
 thy words to comfort my distressed soul!
 leave me a while to ponder on my sins.
 old man. faustus, i leave thee; but with grief of heart,
 fearing the enemy of thy hapless soul.
 [exit.]
 faustus. accursed faustus, wretch, what hast thou done?
 i do repent; and yet i do despair:
 hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast:
 what shall i do to shun the snares of death?
 mephist. thou traitor, faustus, i arrest thy soul
 for disobedience to my sovereign lord:
 revolt, or i'll in piece-meal tear thy flesh.
 faustus. i do repent i e'er offended him.
 sweet mephistophilis, entreat thy lord
 to pardon my unjust presumption,
 and with my blood again i will confirm
 the former vow i made to lucifer.
 mephist.  do it, then, faustus, with unfeigned heart,
 lest greater dangers do attend thy drift.
 faustus. torment, sweet friend, that base and aged man,
 that durst dissuade me from thy lucifer,
 with greatest torments  that our hell affords.
 mephist. his faith is great; i cannot touch his soul;
 but what i may afflict  his body with
 i will attempt, which is but little worth.
 faustus. one thing, good servant, let me crave of thee,
 to glut the longing of my heart's desire,—
 that i may have unto my paramour
 that heavenly helen which i saw of late,
 whose sweet embraces may extinguish clean 
 those thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
 and keep my oath  i made to lucifer.
 mephist. this, or what else my faustus shall desire,
 shall be perform'd in twinkling of an eye.
 re-enter helen, passing over the stage between two cupids.
 faustus. was this the face that launch'd a thousand ships,
 and burnt the topless towers of ilium?—
 sweet helen, make me immortal with a kiss.—
 [kisses her.]
 her lips suck forth my soul: see, where it flies!—
 come, helen, come, give me my soul again.
 here will i dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
 and all is dross that is not helena.
 i will be paris, and for love of thee,
 instead of troy, shall wittenberg be sack'd;
 and i will combat with weak menelaus,
 and wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
 yea, i will wound achilles in the heel,
 and then return to helen for a kiss.
 o, thou art fairer than the evening  air
 clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
 brighter art thou than flaming jupiter
 when he appear'd to hapless semele;
 more lovely than the monarch of the sky
 in wanton arethusa's azur'd  arms;
 and none but thou shalt  be my paramour!
 [exeunt.]
 thunder. enter lucifer, belzebub, and mephistophilis.
 lucifer. thus from infernal dis do we ascend
 to view the subjects of our monarchy,
 those souls which sin seals the black sons of hell;
 'mong which, as chief, faustus, we come to thee,
 bringing with us lasting damnation
 to wait upon thy soul: the time is come
 which makes it forfeit.
 mephist. and, this gloomy night,
 here, in this room, will wretched faustus be.
 belzebub. and here we'll stay,
 to mark him how he doth demean himself.
 mephist. how should he but in desperate lunacy?
 fond worldling, now his heart-blood dries with grief;
 his conscience kills it; and his  labouring brain
 begets a world of idle fantasies
 to over-reach the devil; but all in vain;
 his store of pleasures must be sauc'd with pain.
 he and his servant wagner are at hand;
 both come from drawing faustus' latest will.
 see, where they come!
 enter faustus and wagner.
 faustus. say, wagner,—thou hast perus'd my will,—
 how dost thou like it?
 wagner. sir, so wondrous well,
 as in all humble duty i do yield
 my life and lasting service for your love.
 faustus. gramercy,  wagner.
 enter scholars.
 welcome, gentlemen.
 [exit wagner.]
 first scholar. now, worthy faustus, methinks your looks are chang'd.
 faustus. o, gentlemen!
 second scholar. what ails faustus?
 faustus. ah, my sweet chamber-fellow, had i lived with thee,
 then had i lived still! but now must die eternally. look, sirs,
 comes he not? comes he not?
 first scholar. o my dear faustus, what imports this fear?
 second scholar. is all our pleasure turn'd to melancholy?
 third scholar. he is not well with being over-solitary.
 second scholar. if it be so, we'll have physicians,
 and faustus shall be cur'd.
 third scholar. 'tis but a surfeit, sir;  fear nothing.
 faustus. a surfeit of deadly  sin, that hath damned both
 body and soul.
 second scholar. yet, faustus, look up to heaven, and remember
 mercy is infinite.
 faustus. but faustus' offence can ne'er be pardoned: the serpent
 that tempted eve may be saved, but not faustus. o gentlemen,
 hear me  with patience, and tremble not at my speeches! though
 my heart pant and quiver to remember that i have been a student
 here these thirty years, o, would i had never  seen wittenberg,
 never read book! and what wonders i have done, all germany can
 witness, yea, all the world; for which faustus hath lost both
 germany and the world, yea, heaven itself, heaven, the seat of
 god, the throne of the blessed, the kingdom of joy; and must
 remain in hell for ever, hell. o, hell, for ever! sweet friends,
 what shall become of faustus, being in hell for ever?
 second scholar. yet, faustus, call on god.
 faustus. on god, whom faustus hath abjured! on god, whom faustus
 hath blasphemed! o my god, i would weep! but the devil draws in
 my tears. gush forth blood, instead of tears! yea, life and soul!
 o, he stays my tongue! i would lift up my hands; but see, they
 hold 'em, they hold 'em? ('?' sic)
 all. who, faustus?
 faustus. why, lucifer and mephistophilis. o gentlemen, i gave
 them my soul for my cunning!
 all. o, god forbid!
 faustus. god forbade it, indeed; but faustus hath done it: for
 the vain pleasure of four-and-twenty years hath faustus lost
 eternal joy and felicity. i writ them a bill with mine own blood:
 the date is expired; this is the time, and he will fetch me.
 first scholar. why did not faustus tell us of this before,
 that divines might have prayed for thee?
 faustus. oft have i thought to have done so; but the devil
 threatened to tear me in pieces, if i named god, to fetch me
 body and soul, if i once gave ear to divinity: and now 'tis 
 too late. gentlemen, away, lest you perish with me.
 second scholar. o, what may we do to save faustus?
 faustus. talk not of me, but save yourselves, and depart.
 third scholar. god will strengthen me; i will stay with faustus.
 first scholar. tempt not god, sweet friend; but let us into the
 next room, and pray for him.
 faustus. ay, pray for me, pray for me; and what noise soever
 you hear, come not unto me, for nothing can rescue me.
 second scholar. pray thou, and we will pray that god may have mercy
 upon thee.
 faustus. gentlemen, farewell: if i live till morning, i'll visit
 you; if not, faustus is gone to hell.
 all. faustus, farewell.
 [exeunt scholars.]
 mephist. ay, faustus, now thou hast no hope of heaven;
 therefore despair; think only upon hell,
 for that must be thy mansion, there to dwell.
 faustus. o thou bewitching fiend, 'twas thy temptation
 hath robb'd me of eternal happiness!
 mephist. i do confess it, faustus, and rejoice:
 'twas i that, when thou wert i'the way to heaven,
 damm'd up thy passage; when thou took'st the book
 to view the scriptures, then i turn'd the leaves,
 and led thine eye. 
 what, weep'st thou? 'tis too late; despair! farewell:
 fools that will laugh on earth must weep in hell.
 [exit.] 
 enter good angel and evil angel at several doors.
 good angel. o faustus, if thou hadst given ear to me,
 innumerable joys had follow'd thee!
 but thou didst love the world.
 evil angel. gave ear to me,
 and now must taste hell-pains  perpetually.
 good angel. o, what will all thy riches, pleasures, pomps,
 avail thee now?
 evil angel. nothing, but vex thee more,
 to want in hell, that had on earth such store.
 good angel. o, thou hast lost celestial happiness,
 pleasures unspeakable, bliss without end
 hadst thou affected sweet divinity,
 hell or the devil had had no power on thee:
 hadst thou kept on that way, faustus, behold,
 [music, while a throne descends.]
 in what resplendent glory thou hadst sit 
 in yonder throne, like those bright-shining saints,
 and triumph'd over hell! that hast thou lost;
 and now, poor soul, must thy good angel leave thee:
 the jaws of hell are open  to receive thee.
 [exit. the throne ascends.]
 evil angel. now, faustus, let thine eyes with horror stare
 [hell is discovered.]
 into that vast perpetual torture-house:
 there are the furies tossing damned souls
 on burning forks; there bodies boil  in lead;
 there are live quarters broiling on the coals,
 that ne'er can die; this ever-burning chair
 is for o'er-tortur'd souls to rest them in;
 these that are fed with sops of flaming fire,
 were gluttons, and lov'd only delicates,
 and laugh'd to see the poor starve at their gates:
 but yet all these are nothing; thou shalt see
 ten thousand tortures that more horrid be.
 faustus. o, i have seen enough to torture me!
 evil angel. nay, thou must feel them, taste the smart of all:
 he that loves pleasure must for pleasure fall:
 and so i leave thee, faustus, till anon;
 then wilt thou tumble in confusion.
 [exit. hell disappears.—the clock strikes eleven.]
 faustus. o faustus,
 now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
 and then thou must be damn'd perpetually!
 stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,
 that time may cease, and midnight never come;
 fair nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make
 perpetual day; or let this hour be but
 a year, a month, a week, a natural day,
 that faustus may repent and save his soul!
 o lente, lente currite, noctis equi!
 the stars move still, time runs, the clock will strike,
 the devil will come, and faustus must be damn'd.
 o, i'll leap up to heaven!—who pulls me down?—
 see, where christ's blood streams in the firmament! 
 one drop of blood will save me: o my christ!—
 rend not my heart for naming of my christ;
 yet will i call on him: o, spare me, lucifer!—
 where is it now? 'tis gone:
 and, see, a threatening arm, an  angry brow!
 mountains and hills, come, come, and fall on me,
 and hide me from the heavy wrath of heaven!
 no!
 then will i headlong run into the earth:
 gape, earth! o, no, it will not harbour me!
 you stars that reign'd at my nativity,
 whose influence hath  allotted death and hell,
 now draw up faustus, like a foggy mist,
 into the entrails of yon  labouring cloud[s],
 that, when you  vomit forth into the air,
 my limbs may issue from your smoky mouths;
 but let my soul mount and ascend to heaven!
 [the clock strikes the half-hour.]
 o, half the hour is past! 'twill all be past anon.
 o, if  my soul must suffer for my sin,
 impose some end to my incessant pain;
 let faustus live in hell a thousand years,
 a hundred thousand, and at last  be sav'd!
 no end is limited to damned souls.
 why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?
 or why is this immortal that thou hast?
 o, pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
 this soul should fly from me, and i be chang'd
 into some brutish beast! all beasts are happy,
 for, when they die,
 their souls are soon dissolv'd in elements;
 but mine must live still to be plagu'd in hell.
 curs'd be the parents that engender'd me!
 no, faustus, curse thyself, curse lucifer
 that hath depriv'd thee of the joys of heaven.
 [the clock strikes twelve.]
 it strikes, it strikes! now, body, turn to air,
 or lucifer will bear thee quick to hell!
 o soul, be chang'd into small water-drops,
 and fall into the ocean, ne'er be found!
 thunder. enter devils.
 o, mercy, heaven! look not so fierce on me!
 adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
 ugly hell, gape not! come not, lucifer!
 i'll burn my books!—o mephistophilis!
 [exeunt devils with faustus.]
 enter scholars. 
 first scholar. come, gentlemen, let us go visit faustus,
 for such a dreadful night was never seen;
 since first the world's creation did begin,
 such fearful shrieks and cries were never heard:
 pray heaven the doctor have escap'd the danger.
 o, help us, heaven!  see, here are faustus' limbs,
 all torn asunder by the hand of death!
 the devils whom faustus serv'd have  torn him thus;
 for, twixt the hours of twelve and one, methought,
 i heard him shriek and call aloud for help;
 at which self  time the house seem'd all on fire
 with dreadful horror of these damned fiends.
 second scholar. well, gentlemen, though faustus' end be such
 as every christian heart laments to think on,
 yet, for he was a scholar once admir'd
 for wondrous knowledge in our german schools,
 we'll give his mangled limbs due burial;
 and all the students, cloth'd in mourning black,
 shall wait upon his heavy funeral.
 [exeunt.]
 enter chorus.
 chorus. cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
 and burned is apollo's laurel-bough,
 that sometime grew within this learned man.
 faustus is gone: regard his hellish fall,
 whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise,
 only to wonder at unlawful things,
 whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
 to practise more than heavenly power permits.
 [exit.]
 terminat hora diem; terminat auctor opus.
  (return) [ carthagens: so tos ,
 , (and compare to , p. ).—to  "carthagen."
 p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "where mars did mate the carthaginians;" ]
  (return) [ her: old eds. "his."]
  (return) [ of: so to .—tos
 , , "and."]
  (return) [ upon: so to .—tos
 , , "on the."]
  (return) [ thousand: so to .—tos
 , , "diuers."]
  (return) [ them: so to .—tos
 , , "men."]
  (return) [ legatur: old eds.
 "legatus."]
  (return) [ petty: i may notice that
 to  has "pretty," which is perhaps the right reading.]
  (return) [ &c.: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ circles, scenes, letters,
 and characters: so to  (see note ||, p. ).—the later tos
 "circles, letters, characters."
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "scenes: "and sooner may a gulling weather-spie
 by drawing forth heavens sceanes tell certainly," &c.
 donne's first satyre,—p. , ed. ." ]
  (return) [ gain: so tos , 
 (and so to ).—to  "get."]
  (return) [ these: see note §, p. .
 note §, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "these elements: so again, "within the bowels of these
 elements," &c., on p. , first col,—"these" being
 equivalent to the. (not unfrequently in our old writers
 these is little more than redundant.)" ]
  (return) [ enterprise: so to .—tos
 , , "enterprises."]
  (return) [ make swift rhine circle
 fair: so to .—tos , , "with swift rhine circle all."]
  (return) [ silk: old eds. "skill."]
  (return) [ blest: so to .—tos
 , , "wise."]
  (return) [ swarm: so tos ,
 .—to  "sworne."]
  (return) [ to: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ have: so tos , .—to
  "has."]
  (return) [ shall they: so to .—tos
 , , "they shall."]
  (return) [ huge: so to .—tos
 , , "whole."]
  (return) [ stuffs: so tos ,
 .—to  "stuff'd."]
  (return) [ renowm'd: so to 
 (see note ||, p. ).—tos , , "renown'd."
 note ||, from p. . (the first part of tamburlaine the
 great):
 "renowmed: i.e. renowned.—so the vo.—the to "renowned."
 —the form "renowmed" (fr. renomme) occurs repeatedly
 afterwards in this play, according to the vo. it is
 occasionally found in writers posterior to marlowe's
 time. e.g.
 "of constantines great towne renoum'd in vaine."
 verses to king james, prefixed to lord stirling's
 monarchicke tragedies, ed. ." ]
  (return) [ albertus': old eds.
 "albanus."]
  (return) [ that: so tos , .—to
  "the."]
  (return) [ him: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ enter faustus: old eds.
 "thunder. enter lucifer and  deuils, faustus to them with this speech,"—wrongly.]
  (return) [ her: so to .—tos
 , , "his."]
  (return) [ erring: so tos ,
 .—to  "euening."]
  (return) [ mephistophilis dragon,
 quod tumeraris: see note *, p. .
 note *, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "surgat mephistophilis, quod tumeraris: the later tos have
 "surgat mephistophilis dragon, quod tumeraris."—there is a
 corruption here, which seems to defy emendation. for "quod
 tumeraris," mr. j. crossley, of manchester, would read
 (rejecting the word "dragon") "quod tu mandares" (the
 construction being "quod tu mandares ut mephistophilis
 appareat et surgat"): but the "tu" does not agree with the
 preceding "vos."—the revd. j. mitford proposes "surgat
 mephistophilis, per dragon (or dagon) quod numen est aeris."" ]
  (return) [ dicatus: so tos ,
 .—to  "dicatis."]
  (return) [ came hither: so tos
 , .—to  "came now hether."]
  (return) [ speeches: so to .—not
 in the later tos.]
  (return) [ accidens: so tos ,
 .—to  "accident."]
  (return) [ fell: so to .—the
 later tos "liue."]
  (return) [ strike: so to .—tos
 , , "strikes."]
  (return) [ thorough: so to .—tos
 , , "through."]
  (return) [ sirrah: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ save: so tos , .—to
  "spare."]
  (return) [ again: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ or: old eds. "for."]
  (return) [ vestigiis nostris: old
 eds. "vestigias nostras."]
  (return) [ backward: so to 
 (and so to ).—tos , , "backe."]
  (return) [ why: so to  (and so
 to ).—not in tos , .]
  (return) [ that famous: so to .—tos
 , , "that most famous."]
  (return) [ of: so to .—tos
 , , "be."]
  (return) [ men: so tos , 
 (and so to ).—to  "them."]
  (return) [ mephistophile: so to
 .—tos , , "mephostophilis."]
  (return) [ thee: so to .—the
 later tos "him."]
  (return) [ thine: so tos ,
 .—to  "thy."]
  (return) [ and: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ my: so to .—tos
 , , "thy."]
  (return) [ is it: so to .—tos
 , , "it is."]
  (return) [ soul: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ an: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ should: so tos ,
 .—to  "shall."]
  (return) [ god: so to .—the
 later tos "heauen."]
  (return) [ this scroll: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ he desires: not in the
 tos. see note |, p. .
 note |, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "he desires: not in any of the four tos. in the tract just
 cited, i.e. the history of doctor faustus, ed. . the
 "d article" stands thus,—"that mephostophiles should bring
 him any thing, and doe for him whatsoever." sig. a , ed.
 . a later ed. adds "he desired." marlowe, no doubt,
 followed some edition of the history in which these words,
 or something equivalent to them, had been omitted by mistake.
 (to , which i consider as of no authority, has "he
 requireth.")" ]
  (return) [ and: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ with: so to .—not
 in the later tos.]
  (return) [ the: so to .—tos
 , , "that."]
  (return) [ are: so tos , .—to
  "is."]
  (return) [ hell's a fable: so to
 .—tos , , "hell's a meere fable."]
  (return) [ thine: so tos ,
 .—to  "thy."]
  (return) [ thy: so tos , .—to
  "thine."]
  (return) [ was: so to .—tos
 , , "were."]
  (return) [ harness: i.e. armour.]
  (return) [ this will i keep as chary
 as my life. [exeunt.:
 enter faustus, in his study, and mephistophilis.
 faustus. when i behold the heavens, &c.:
 old eds. (that is, tos , , ) thus;
"this will i keepe, as chary as my life.
 [exeunt.:
 enter wagner solus.
wagner. learned faustus
to know the secrets of astronomy
grauen in the booke of joues high firmament,
did mount himselfe to scale olympus top,
being seated in a chariot burning bright,
drawne by the strength of yoaky [to  "yoaked": dragons necks,
he now is gone to proue cosmography,
and as i gesse will first arriue at rome,
to see the pope and manner of his court;
and take some part of holy peters feast,
that to [tos , , "on": this day is highly solemnized.
 exit wagner.
 enter faustus in his study, and mephistophilis.
 faustus. when i behold the heauens," &c.
 the lines which i have here omitted belong to a subsequent part of the
 play, where they will be found with considerable additions, and are
 rightly assigned to the chorus. (as given in the present place by the tos
 , , , these lines exhibit the text of the earlier faustus; see
 p. , sec. col.) it would seem that something was intended to intervene
 here between the exit of faustus and mephistophilis, and their
 re-appearance on the stage: compare, however, the preceding play, p. ,
 first col.
 p. , sec. col. (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "faustus. great thanks, mighty lucifer!
 this will i keep as chary as my life.
 lucifer. farewell, faustus, and think on the devil.
 faustus. farewell, great lucifer.
 [exeunt lucifer and belzebub.:
 come, mephistophilis.
 [exeunt.:
 enter chorus.
 chorus. learned faustus,
 to know the secrets of astronomy
 graven in the book of jove's high firmament,
 did mount himself to scale olympus' top,
 being seated in a chariot burning bright,
 drawn by the strength of yoky dragons' necks.
 he now is gone to prove cosmography,
 and, as i guess, will first arrive at rome,
 to see the pope and manner of his court,
 and take some part of holy peter's feast,
 that to this day is highly solemniz'd.
 [exit.:
 enter faustus and mephistophilis.
 faustus. having now, my good mephistophilis,
 pass'd with delight the stately town of trier," etc.
 p. , first col. (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 this part of the play does not have any relevance to characters
 leaving the stage and re-entering.
 perhaps the editor meant p. , first column.
 p. , first col. (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "ralph. o, brave, robin! shall i have nan spit, and to mine
 own use? on that condition i'll feed thy devil with horse-
 bread as long as he lives, of free cost.
 robin. no more, sweet ralph: let's go and make clean our
 boots, which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our conjuring
 in the devil's name.
 [exeunt.:
 enter robin and ralph with a silver goblet.
 robin. come, ralph: did not i tell thee, we were for ever
 made by this doctor faustus' book? ecce, signum! here's a
 simple purchase for horse-keepers: our horses shall eat
 no hay as long as this lasts.
 ralph. but, robin, here comes the vintner." ]
  (return) [ thine: so tos ,
 .—to  "thy."]
  (return) [ is: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ breathes: so tos ,
 .—to  "breathe."]
  (return) [ ears: so tos , .—to
  "eare."]
  (return) [ this i: so tos ,
 .—to  "this time i."]
  (return) [ termine: i may notice
 that to  (see p. , sec. col.) has "terminine," which at least is
 better for the metre.
 p. , second column, (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "whose terminine is term'd the world's wide pole;" ]
  (return) [ erring: so to .—the
 later tos "euening."]
  (return) [ motion: so tos ,
 .—to  "motions."]
  (return) [ ay: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ and: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ the: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ lips: so to .—not
 in the later tos.]
  (return) [ and ever since have run:
 so to .—tos , , "and haue euer since run."]
  (return) [ this: so to .—the
 later tos "these."]
  (return) [ come: so to .—tos
 , , "came."]
  (return) [ i: so tos , .—to
  (return) [ l: old eds. "lechery."
 see note ||, p. .
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "l.: all the tos "lechery."—here i have made the alteration
 recommended by mr. collier in his preface to coleridge's
 seven lectures on shakespeare and milton, p. cviii." ]
  (return) [ tut: so to .—the
 later tos "but."]
  (return) [ robin: old eds. "the
 clowne" (and so frequently afterwards): but he is evidently a distinct
 person from the "clown," wagner's attendant, who has previously appeared
 (see p. ). most probably the parts of the clown and robin were played
 by the same actor; and hence the confusion in the old eds.
 p. . (this play):
 "enter wagner and clown.
 wagner. come hither, sirrah boy." etc. ]
  (return) [ faith: so to .—tos
 ,  "i'faith." (and so afterwards in this scene.)]
  (return) [ not tell: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ as fair a: so to .—tos
 , , "a faire."]
  (return) [ need'st: so tos ,
 .—to  "needs."]
  (return) [ hold, belly, hold:
 compare florio's dict., ; "iosa, good store, hold-bellie-hold."]
  (return) [ prithee: so to .—tos
 , , "i prithee."]
  (return) [ him: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ he views: so to .—tos
 , , "to view."]
  (return) [ with this: so tos ,
 .—to  "with his." this passage is sufficiently obscure.]
  (return) [ round: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ rhine: so tos ,
 .—to  "rhines."]
  (return) [ up to: so to .—tos
 , , "vnto."]
  (return) [ quarter the town in
 four equivalents: so to .—not in the later tos.]
  (return) [ thorough: so to .—tos
 , , "through."]
  (return) [ rest: so to .—the
 later tos "east."]
  (return) [ me: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ us: so to .—tos
 , , "you."]
  (return) [ through: so tos ,
 .—to  "thorow."]
  (return) [ ponte: old eds.
 "ponto."]
  (return) [ match: so tos ,
 .—to  "watch."]
  (return) [ the: so to .—tos
 , , "those."]
  (return) [ in state and: so tos
 , .—to  "this day with."]
  (return) [ whilst: so to .—tos
 , , "while."]
  (return) [ thorough: so to .—tos
 , , "through."]
  (return) [ my: qy. "one"?]
  (return) [ cunning: so tos ,
 .—to  "comming." (and so in the fourth line of the next
 speech.)]
  (return) [ this: so to .—tos
 , , "his."]
  (return) [ at: so to .—tos
 , , "to."]
  (return) [ it: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ and smite with death
 thy hated enterprise: so to . —not in tos , .]
  (return) [ our: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ this: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ have right: so tos
 , .—to  "haue some right."]
  (return) [ shall: so tos ,
 .—to  "shalt."]
  (return) [ hath: so tos ,
 .—to  "haue."]
  (return) [ synod: qy. "holy
 synod"?]
  (return) [ ponte: old eds.
 "ponto."]
  (return) [ his: so to .—tos
 , , "this."]
  (return) [ sennet: old eds.
 "senit" and "sonet". see note ||, p. .
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "sonnet: variously written, sennet, signet, signate, &c.—a
 particular set of notes on the trumpet, or cornet, different
 from a flourish. see nares's gloss. in v. sennet." ]
  (return) [ be: so tos , .—to
  "are."]
  (return) [ them to: so to .—tos
 , , "them forth to."]
  (return) [ archbishop.: old eds.
 "bish." and "bishop" (and so afterwards).]
  (return) [ you: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ beholding: so to 
 (see note ||, p. ).—tos , , "beholden."
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "beholding: i.e. beholden." ]
  (return) [ such: so tos ,
 .—to  "this."]
  (return) [ it: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ his: so tos ,
 .—to  "this."]
  (return) [ struck: here the old
 eds. have "stroke" and "strooke:" but in the next clause they all agree in
 having "strucke."]
  (return) [ on: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ same: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ at the hard heels: the
 modern editors, ignorant of the old phraseology, thought that they
 corrected this passage in printing "hard at the heels."]
  (return) [ vintner: so all the old
 eds.; and presently robin addresses this person as "vintner:" yet dick has
 just spoken of him as "the vintner's boy." see note ||, p. .
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "drawer: there is an inconsistency here: the vintner cannot
 properly be addressed as "drawer." the later tos are also
 inconsistent in the corresponding passage: dick says, "the
 vintner's boy follows us at the hard heels," and immediately
 the "vintner" enters." ]
  (return) [ your: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ much: equivalent to—by
 no means, not at all. this ironical exclamation is very common in our old
 dramatists. (mr. hunter, —new illust. of shakespeare, ii. ,—explains
 it very differently.)]
  (return) [ by lady: i.e. by our
 lady.]
  (return) [ to: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ tester: i.e. sixpence.]
  (return) [ the state: i.e. the
 raised chair or throne, with a canopy.]
  (return) [ perfect: so tos ,
 .—to  "warlike."]
  (return) [ rouse: i.e. bumper.]
  (return) [ a: so to .—tos
 , , "ten."]
  (return) [ a: so tos , .—to
  "the."]
  (return) [ renowm'd: old eds.
 "renown'd"; but earlier, p. , first col., to  has "renowm'd": see
 note  and see note ||, p. .
 note ||, from p. . (the first part of tamburlaine the
 great):
 "renowmed: i.e. renowned.—so the vo.—the to "renowned."
 —the form "renowmed" (fr. renomme) occurs repeatedly
 afterwards in this play, according to the vo. it is
 occasionally found in writers posterior to marlowe's
 time. e.g.
 "of constantines great towne renoum'd in vaine."
 verses to king james, prefixed to lord stirling's
 monarchicke tragedies, ed. ." ]
  (return) [ through: so tos ,
 .—to  "thorow."]
  (return) [ these: so to .—tos
 , , "those."]
  (return) [ through: so tos ,
 .—to  "thorow."]
  (return) [ a: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ this: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ demand: so tos ,
 .—to  "demands."]
  (return) [ door: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ state: see note §, p.
 . i.e. note —so tos , .—to  "seat."]
  (return) [ these: so to .—tos
 , , "they."]
  (return) [ renowmed: old eds.
 "renowned." see note |, p. . i.e. note  ]
  (return) [ thoughts: so tos ,
 .—to  "thought."]
  (return) [ whilst: so to .—tos
 , , "while."]
  (return) [ i gain'd: so tos ,
 .—to  "i had gain'd."]
  (return) [ at window: so to .—tos
 , , "at the window."]
  (return) [ is: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ this is: so to 
 (and rightly, as the next line proves).—tos , , "is this."]
  (return) [ as: so to .—to
  "that."—to  "and."]
  (return) [ belimoth....asteroth:
 old eds. here "belimote (and "belimot") ....asterote": but see p. ,
 first col.
 p. . (this play):
 "but wherefore do i dally my revenge?—
 asteroth, belimoth, mephistophilis?" ]
  (return) [ has: so to .—tos
 , , "hath."]
  (return) [ horns: so tos ,
 .—to  "horne."]
  (return) [ sir: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ of: i.e. on.]
  (return) [ sway: so tos ,
 .—to  "stay."]
  (return) [ this attempt against
 the conjurer: see note, * p. .
 note *, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "mephistophilis, transform him straight: according to the
 history of dr. faustus, the knight was not present during
 faustus's "conference" with the emperor; nor did he offer
 the doctor any insult by doubting his skill in magic. we
 are there told that faustus happening to see the knight
 asleep, "leaning out of a window of the great hall," fixed
 a huge pair of hart's horns on his head; "and, as the knight
 awaked, thinking to pull in his head, he hit his hornes
 against the glasse, that the panes thereof flew about his
 eares: thinke here how this good gentleman was vexed, for
 he could neither get backward nor forward." after the emperor
 and the courtiers, to their great amusement, had beheld the
 poor knight in this condition, faustus removed the horns.
 when faustus, having taken leave of the emperor, was a league
 and a half from the city, he was attacked in a wood by the
 knight and some of his companions: they were in armour, and
 mounted on fair palfreys; but the doctor quickly overcame
 them by turning all the bushes into horsemen, and "so
 charmed them, that every one, knight and other, for the
 space of a whole moneth, did weare a paire of goates
 hornes on their browes, and every palfry a paire of oxe
 hornes on his head; and this was their penance appointed
 by faustus." a second attempt of the knight to revenge
 himself on faustus proved equally unsuccessful. sigs. g ,
 i , ed. ." ]
  (return) [ that: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ my: so to .—tos
 , , "thy."]
  (return) [ that: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ an: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ boldly: so to .—tos
 , , "brauely."]
  (return) [ heart's: so tos ,
 .—to  "heart."]
  (return) [ that: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ the: so to .—tos
 , , "that."]
  (return) [ now: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ art: old eds. "heart"
 (which, after all, may be right).]
  (return) [ there: so tos ,
 .—to  "here."]
  (return) [ his: so tos ,
 .—not in to sic .]
  (return) [ pull: so tos ,
 .—to  "put."]
  (return) [ all: old eds. "call."]
  (return) [ through: so tos ,
 .—to  "thorow."]
  (return) [ amongst: so to .—tos
 , , "among."]
  (return) [ enter the ambushed
 soldiers: here (though it seems that faustus does not quit the stage) a
 change of scene is supposed.]
  (return) [ these: so to .—tos
 , , "the."]
  (return) [ the door: i.e. the
 stage-door,—the writer here addressing himself to the actor only,
 for the scene lies in a wood.]
  (return) [ zounds: so tos ,
 .—to , "zons."]
  (return) [ all are: so to .—tos
 , , "are all."]
  (return) [ these: so tos ,
 .—to  "this."]
  (return) [ escape: so tos ,
 .—to  "scape."]
  (return) [ has: so tos ,
 .—to  "hath."]
  (return) [ you: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ guess: a corruption of
 guests (very frequent in our early dramatists) which occurs again at p.
 . first col. so to .—tos , , "guests." see note
  (return) [ thou: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ now: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ sir: qy. "sirs"? but
 see the next speech of the carter, and the next speech but one of the
 horse-courser, who, in his narrative, uses both "sirs" and "sir."]
  (return) [ as i was going to
 wittenberg, t'other day, &c.: see the history of doctor faustus, chap.
 xxxv,—"how doctor faustus eat a load of hay."—the carter does
 not appear in the earlier play.]
  (return) [ my: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ cursen: i.e.
 christened.]
  (return) [ some quality: so to
 .—tos , , "some rare quality."]
  (return) [ rid: so to .—tos
 , , "ride."]
  (return) [ that enchanted castle
 in the air: this is not mentioned in the earlier play: but see the history
 of doctor faustus, chap xl, —"how doctor faustus through his charmes
 made a great castle in presence of the duke of anholt."]
  (return) [ delighted: so to .—tos
 , , "delighteth."]
  (return) [ it pleaseth: so to
 .—tos , , "it hath pleased."]
  (return) [ come: so to .—tos
 , , "came."]
  (return) [ these ripe grapes: so
 to .—tos , , "these grapes."]
  (return) [ the clowns bounce,
 &c: to  "the clowne bounce." tos , , "the clowne
 bounceth." (in the next stage-direction all the tos have "they knock
 again," &c.)]
  (return) [ for: so to .—tos
 , , "to."]
  (return) [ pardons: so tos ,
 .—to  "pardon."]
  (return) [ me: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ spake: so tos ,
 .—to  "spoke."]
  (return) [ dost hear him: so to
 .—to  "dost thou heare me." to  "dost thou heare
 him."]
  (return) [ him: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ you: so tos ,
 .—not in to  (but compare the carter's next speech).]
  (return) [ i: so to .—not
 in tos , .]
  (return) [ not i: so tos ,
 .—to  "i not."]
  (return) [ ha': so to .—tos
 , , "haue."]
  (return) [ guess: see note §, p.
 . i.e. note  so to . —tos , , "guests."]
  (return) [ beholding: so tos
 , , (see note ||, p. ).—to  "beholden."
 note ||, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "beholding: i.e. beholden." ]
  (return) [ sport: so to .—tos
 , , "sports."
  (return) [ i think my master,
 &c.: the alterations which this speech has undergone will hardly admit
 of its arrangement as verse: compare the earlier play, p. , first col.
 p. , first col. (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "enter wagner.
 wagner. i think my master means to die shortly,
 for he hath given to me all his goods:
 and yet, methinks, if that death were near,
 he would not banquet, and carouse, and swill
 amongst the students, as even now he doth,
 who are at supper with such belly-cheer
 as wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
 see, where they come! belike the feast is ended.
 [exit.:" ]
  (return) [ goods: so tos ,
 .—to  "good."]
  (return) [ ne'er: so to .—tos
 , , "neuer."]
  (return) [ ended: so tos ,
 , (and so to ).—to  "done."]
  (return) [ war: old eds.
 "warres."]
  (return) [ wit: so tos ,
 .—to  "will."]
  (return) [ or envy of thee: so to
 .—tos , , "or of enuie to thee."]
  (return) [ mephist.: this and the
 next prefix are omitted in the old eds.]
  (return) [ torments: so tos ,
  (and so to ).—to  "torment."]
  (return) [ i may afflict: so to
 .—to  "i afflict."—to  "i can afflict."]
  (return) [ clean: so to .—the
 later tos "clear."]
  (return) [ oath: so to .—the
 later tos "vow."]
  (return) [ evening: so to .—the
 later tos "euenings."]
  (return) [ azur'd: so to  (a
 reading which i prefer only because it is also that of to .)—tos
 , , "azure."]
  (return) [ shalt: see note *, p.
 note *, from p. . (doctor faustus, from the quarto of ):
 "shalt: so all the tos; and so i believe marlowe wrote,
 though the grammar requires "shall."" ]
  (return) [ his: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ gramercy: so tos ,
 .—to  "gramercies."]
  (return) [ sir: so tos ,
 .—not in to .]
  (return) [ of deadly: so to .—tos
 , , "of a deadly."]
  (return) [ me: so tos , .—not
 in to .]
  (return) [ never: so to .—tos
 , , "nere."]
  (return) [ 'tis: so to .—tos
 , , "it is."]
  (return) [ and led thine eye: a
 portion of this line has evidently dropt out.]
  (return) [ exit: it seems doubtful
 whether lucifer and belzebub should also make their exeunt here, or
 whether they remain to witness the catastrophe: see p. , first col.
 p. , first column. (this play):
 "mephist. and, this gloomy night,
 here, in this room, will wretched faustus be.
 belzebub. and here we'll stay,
