Early English Meals and Manners





The Project Gutenberg EBook of Early English Meals and Manners, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Early English Meals and Manners

Author: Various

Editor: Frederick Furnivall

Release Date: March 9, 2008 [EBook #24790]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY ENGLISH MEALS AND MANNERS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Kathryn Lybarger and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








This e-text includes characters that will only display in UTF-8
(Unicode) file encoding:

ȝ (yogh)
œ (oe ligature)
There are also a few lines of Greek, and some rarer characters used
only in one or two selections:

ſ (long s)
ł, đ (l, d with bar)
m̅ (m with overline)
If these characters do not display properly, or if the apostrophes
and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage, you may have an
incompatible browser or unavailable fonts. First, make sure that the
browser’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set to Unicode (UTF-8).
You may also need to change your browser’s default font.

The text is intended to reproduce the layout of the original as
closely as possible. If you see a horizontal scroll bar, it may help to
make your browser window narrower (not wider).
Headnotes were printed at the top of alternate pages, like
subsidiary chapter headings. They have been retained in the introductory
section but were omitted from the main text to reduce visual
clutter.
Text-Critical Notes and variant readings have been handled
differently than in the printed book, where they appeared either as
footnotes (numbered) or sidenotes (sometimes but not always marked).
Here, the word they refer to is underlined if necessary, and the note itself will
generally have this form:

leak] the t of the MS. has a k over it.



Contents (general)

All items except the Table of Contents, the Collations and
Corrigenda,
and the Sidenotes are in separate files.


Preface, including Early English Text
Society material
Full Table of Contents
Collations and Corrigenda
Russell’s Boke of
Nurture, with Notes
Shorter Selections
Index to all Readings
Collected Sidenotes (section
added by transcriber)




 



The title page was printed again before the General Preface. In the e-text
it will there be shown as plain text.
Typography of the table of contents is as close as possible to the
original. Titles shown in small
capitals generally represent longer selections.


CONTENTS.





PAGE



FOREWORDS, OR GENERAL
PREFACE
i



Education in Early
England
iv



Cleanliness, or Dirt, of Men,
Houses, &c.

lxiii



Notice of the separate Poems
up to Russell

lxviii




PREFACE TO RUSSELL’S BOKE OF NURTURE,
and the Poems and Treatises following it (except those in the
Postscript)

lxix



COLLATIONS AND CORRECTIONS
xcii



JOHN RUSSELL’S BOKE OF
NURTURE

 1



(Contents thereof,
inserted after title; Notes
thereon, p. 84. Lawrens
Andrewe on Fish, p. 113.)





Wilyam Bulleyn on Boxyng and
Neckeweede

124



Andrew Borde on Sleep, Rising, and
Dress

128



William Vaughan’s Fifteen Directions
to preserve Health

133



The Dyet for every Day (from
Sir John Harington’s Schoole of Salerne)

138



On Rising, Diet, and Going
to Bed (from the same)

140



Recipes (for Fritters,
Jussell, and Mawmeny)

145



Recipes (for Hares and Conies
in Civeye, and for Doucettes)

146



WYNKYN DE WORDE’S BOKE OF KERUYNGE (ed.
1513)

147



(Contents thereof,
p. 150;
Notes thereon,
p. 173.
Note on the first edition of
1508,
p. lxxxvii.)





The
Boke of Curtasye (from the Sloane MS. 1986, ab. 1460 A.D.)

175



Contents thereof,
p. 176. Notes thereto,
p. 283





The Booke
of Demeanor (from The Schoole of Vertue by Richard Weste)

207



Bp. Grossetest’s Household
Statutes (from the Sloane MS. 1986)

215



Stanzas and Couplets of Counsel
(from the Rawlinson MS. C. 86)

219



The Schoole
of Vertue by F. Seager (A.D. 1557)

221



Whate-ever thow sey, avyse thee
welle!

244



A Dogg Lardyner, & a Sowe
Gardyner

246



Maxims in -ly
247



Roger Ascham’s Advice to Lord
Warwick’s Servant

248



The Babees
Book, (or a ‘lytyl Reporte’ of how Young People should
behave)

250




Lerne or be Lewde
258



The A B C of Aristotle
260



Vrbanitatis
262



The Boris Hede furst
264*



The Lytylle Childrenes Lytil
Boke, or Edyllys be (on left-hand pages to p. 273)

265



The Young Children’s Book
(on right-hand pages to p. 274)

266



Stans Puer ad Mensam (in
English, from MS. Harl. 2251; on left-hand pages to p. 281)

275



The Book of Curteisie that is
clepid Stans Puer ad Mensam (from Lambeth MS. 853; on
right-hand pages to p. 282)

276



Notes to the Boke of
Curtasye, &c.

283



Index to the Poems,
&c. (before the Postscript)

286



⁂ POSTSCRIPT (added after the Index was printed).




Ffor to
serve a Lord (see Preface
to Russell, p. lxxii.), with A Feste for a Bryde,
p. 358

349



Suffer, and hold your tongue
361



The Houshold Stuff occupied
at the Lord Mayor’s Feast, A.D.
1505

362



The Ordre of goyng or sittyng
365



Latin Graces
366



Symon’s Lesson of Wysedome for all maner
Chyldryn

381



The Birched School-Boy of
about 1500 A.D.

385



The Song of the School-Boy at
Christmas

387



The Boar’s Head
388



xcii
 


COLLATIONS.

These are given as a warning to other editors either to collate in
foot-notes or not at all. The present plan takes up as much room as
printing a fresh text would, and gives needless trouble to every one
concerned.

This section is included for completeness. The collations have also been
incorporated into their respective texts.

p.
260. The A B C of Aristotle, Harl. MS. 1706, fol. 94,
collated by Mr Brock, omits the prologue, and begins after l. 14
with, “Here be-gynnethe Arystoles A B C. made be mayster
Benett.”
A, for argue not read Angre the
B, omit ne; for not to large read thou nat to
brode
D,   „     „ ; for not read thow nat
E,   „     „ ; for to eernesful read ne
curyons
F, for fers, famuler, freendli, read Ferde, familier,
frenfulle
G, omit to; for & gelosie þou hate, read Ne
to galaunt never
H, for in þine read off
I, for iettynge read Iocunde; for iape not to
read Ioye thow nat
K, omit to and &; for knaue read
knaves
L, for for to leene read ne to lovyng; for
goodis read woordys
M, for medelus read Mellous; for but as mesure
wole it meeue read ne to besynesse vnleffulle
N, for ne use no new iettis read ne noughte to
neffangle
O, for ouerþwart read ouertwarthe; for
& ooþis þou hate read Ne othez to haunte
Q, for quarelose read querelous; for weel ȝoure
souereyns read men alle abowte
R, omit the second to; for not to rudeli read
thou nat but lyte
S, for ne straungeli to stare read Ne starte nat
abowte
T, for for temperaunce is best read But
temperate euere
V, for ne &c. read ne violent Ne waste nat to
moche
W, for neiþer &c. read Ne to wyse deme the
¶ for is euere þe beste of read ys best for vs
Add X Y Z x y wyche esed &
per se.


Tytelle Tytelle Tytelle thañ Esta Amen.

xciii
 



p. 265,

The Lytylle Childrenes Lytil
Boke, with part of the Advocates Library MS., fol. 84, back
(collated by Mr David Laing).
l. 1, for children̄ read childur
l. 2, dele þat
l. 3 dele For
l. 6, for with mary, read oure Lady
l. 7, for arn̄ read byn
l. 9, prefix Forst to Loke
and for wasshe read wasshyd
l. 12, for tylle read to
l. 13, prefix And to Loke
l. 14, is, To he yt reweleth ye howse
ye bytt
l. 16, put the that between loke and on
l. 17, for without any faylys read withowtte fayle
l. 18, for hungery aylys read empty ayle
l. 20, for ete esely read etett eysely



p. 267,

l. 25, for mosselle read morsselle
l. 26, for in read owt of
l. 30, for Into thy read nor in the
for thy salte read hit
l. 31, for fayre on þi read on a
l. 32, for The byfore read Byfore the
and dele þyne
ll. 33-4, are Pyke not yi tethe wyth yi
knyfe
Whyles yu etyst be yi lyfe



The poem in the Advocates’ MS. has 108 lines, and fills 5 pages of
the MS. (Wynkyn de Worde’s version ends with this, after l. 105, ‘And in
his laste ende wyth the swete Ihesus. Amen. Here endeth the boke of
curtesye.’)



p. 265.
The Lytylle Childrenes Lytil
Boke collated with the Cambridge University MS., by Mr Henry
Bradshaw. Hem is always written for him in this MS., and
so with other words.
l. 2, for wrytyne read brekeyd
l. 6, for Elizabeth read cortesey
l. 7, for closide read clodyd
l. 10, for on read yn
l. 11, 12, for þou read ye
l. 14, for hous the bydde read hall þe beyt
l. 15, for þe read they
l. 16, for on read no
l. 17, for any faylys read fayle
l. 18, for aylys read heydyt
l. 19, for Ete ... hastely read yet ... hastey
l. 20, prefix Bot to Abyde
for esely read all yesley



p. 267,
l. 23, for Kerue not thy brede read Kot they bred
not
l. 24, is Ne to theke bat be-tweyn
l. 25, for mosselle read mossels
for begynnysse to read dost
l. 26, for in read owt of
l. 27, for on read yn




xciv
 


ll. 28-30, are Ne yn they met, feys, ne fleys.
Put not thy mete yn þey salt seleyr
l. 32, is Be-fore the, that ys worschep
l. 33, for ne read nother
l. 34, for If read And
for come read comest
l. 35, for And read Seche
put the is before yn
l. 37, for Ete ... by read Kot ... yn
l. 38, prefix And to Fylle; omit done
l. 40, is Weyles thou hetys, bey they leyffe
l. 42, for þow put read take owt
l. 43, for Ne read Nether
l. 44, is For no cortesey het ys not habell
l. 45, for Elbowe ... fyst read Elbowhes ... fystys
l. 46, for whylis þat read wheyle
l. 47, is Bolk not as a bolle yn the crofte
l. 48, for karle þat read charle
for cote read cotte
l. 50, for of hyt or þou art read the or ye be
l. 51, for sterke read lowde



p. 269,
l. 52, is all of curtesy loke ye carpe
l. 53, for at read all
omit loke þou
l. 54, for Loke þou rownde not read And loke ye
l. 55, omit thy
for and read ne
l. 56, for doo read make
l. 57, for laughe not read noþer laughe
l. 58, for with moche speche read thow meche speke;
for mayst read may
l. 59, for first ne read ner
and for the second ne read not
l. 60, for fayre and stylle read stere het not
l. 61, for thy read the
l. 66, omit a
l. 67, for I rede of read of j redde þe of
l. 68, for neþer read neuer
omit yn þi before drynk
l. 69, for þat read they
l. 73, for þou see read be saye
l. 76, for þou read yow
for thow art read yow ar
l. 77, for forthe read before yow
l. 78, omit þow not
l. 79, for ynto read yn



p. 271,
l. 83, for ende read hendyng
l. 84, for wasshen read was
l. 85, for worthy read wortheyor
l. 86, for to- read be-
omit &
for þi prow read gentyll cortesey
ll. 87, 88, 89, are omitted.
l. 90, for nether read not
for ne read ne with
l. 91, omit þi
for the hede read they lorde
l. 92, for hyghly read mekeley
l. 93, for togydre ynsame read yn the same manere




xcv
 


l. 95, for therafter read hereafter
l. 96, after that add he ys
for was heere read þere aftyr
l. 97, omit And
for dispiseth read dispise
l. 99, for Nether read neuer
l. 100, for Ner read ne
l. 101, after for add sent
l. 102, for Louyth this boke read Loren this lesen
l. 103, omit and
for made read wret
l. 106, is omitted.



p. 273,
l. 107, before vs put hem and
l. 108, for the first Amen read Sey all
for the Explicit &c. read Expleycyt
the Boke of cortesey.



xcvi
 


CORRIGENDA, ADDITIONAL NOTES, &c.

This section is included for completeness. Where possible, the changes
noted have been made in the original text, or added as footnotes
numbered in the form “10a”. The bracketed paragraph, following, is from
the original text.
[A few corrections of letters and figures have been made in this
Reprint.]

p. iv. l. 6. ‘Your Bele Babees are
very like the Meninos of the Court of Spain, & Menins
of that of France, young nobles brought up with the young Princes.’
H. Reeve.
p. v. last line. This is not
intended to confine the definition of Music as taught at Oxford to its
one division of Harmonica, to the exclusion of the others,
Rythmica, Metrica, &c. The Arithmetic said to have
been studied there in the time of Edmund the Confessor is defined in his
Life (MS. about 1310 A.D.) in my
E. E. Poems & Lives of Saints, 1862, thus,

Arsmetrike is a lore: þat of figours al is
& of drauȝtes as me draweþ in poudre: & in numbre iwis.

p. xviii. l. 16. The regular
Cathedral school would have existed at St David’s.
p. xix., note 4. “There are no French
universities, though we find every now and then some humbug advertising
himself in the Times as possessing a degree of the Paris
University. The old Universities belong to the time before the
Deluge—that means before the Revolution of 1789. The University of
France is the organized whole of the higher and middle institutions of
learning, in so far as they are directed by the State, not the clergy.
It is an institution more governmental, according to the genius of the
country, than our London University, to which, however, its organization
bears some resemblance. To speak of it in one breath with Oxford or
Aberdeen is to commit the ... error of confounding two things, or
placing them on the same line, because they have the same name.”
—E. Oswald, in The English Leader, Aug. 10, 1867.
p. xxiv. l. 9, for 1574 read 1577.

Corrected in reprint.
p. xxv. l. 17, related apparently.
“The first William de Valence married Joan de Monchensi, sister-in-law
to one Dionysia, and aunt to another.” The Chronicle, Sept. 21,
1867.
p. xxvi. One of the inquiries
ordered by the Articles issued by Archbishop Cranmer, in A.D. 1548, is, “Whether Parsons, Vicars, Clerks, and
other beneficed men, having yearly to dispend an hundred pound, do not
find, competently, one scholar in the University of Cambridge or Oxford,
or some grammar school; and for as many hundred pounds as every of them
may dispend, so many scholars likewise to be found [supported] by them;
and what be their names that they so find.” Toulmin Smith, The
Parish, p. 95. Compare also in Church-Wardens Accompts of St
Margaret’s, Westminster (ed. Jn. Nichols, p. 41).


1631.
Item, to Richard Busby, a king’s scholler of Westminster, towards
enabling him to proceed master of arts at Oxon, by consent of the
vestrie

£6.   13.   4.



xcvii
 

1628.
Item, to Richard Busby, by consent of the vestry, towards
enabling him to proceed bachelor of arts
£5.   0.   0.


Nichols, p. 38. See too p. 37.
p. xxvii., last line. Roger Bacon
died, perhaps, 11 June, 1292, or in 1294. Book of Dates.
p. xxvii., dele note 3. ‘The
truth is that, in his account of Oxford and its early days, Mr Hallam
quotes John of Salisbury, not as asserting that Vacarius taught there,
but as making “no mention of Oxford at all”; while he gives for the
statement about the law school no authority whatever beyond his general
reference throughout to Anthony Wood. But the fact is as historical as a
fact can well be, and the authority for it is a passage in one of the
best of the contemporary authors, Gervaise of Canterbury. “Tunc leges et
causidici in Angliam primo vocati sunt,” he says in his account of
Theobald in the Acts of the Archbishops, “quorum primus erat
magister Vacarius. Hic in Oxonefordiâ legem docuit.”’
E. A. F.
p. xxxiii. note, l. 1, for St Paul’s read St Anthony’s

Corrected in reprint.
p. xxxiv., for sister read brother

Corrected in reprint. The word “brother” appears twice on this page:
“brother of Anne Bulleyn” and “Jane Seymour’s brother”.
p. xlv. l. 2, for poor
read independent. ‘Fitz-Stephen says on the parents of St Thomas,
“Neque fœnerantibus neque officiose negotiantibus, sed de redditibus
suis honorifice viventibus.”’ E. A. F.
p. liii. Thetford. See also p. xli.

Author’s intention unclear. List on
page liii shows Thetford grammar school, founded 1328. Page xli text has “between 1091 and 1119 ...
schools at Thetford”.
p. lxxix. last line. A Postscript of nine fresh pieces has been since
added, on and after p. 349, with ‘The Boris hede furst’ at
p. 264*.

Section rewritten for reprint.
p. 6, l. 77, for the note
on plommys, damsons, see p. 91, note on l.
177.

Note corrected from “177” to “77” in reprint; note moved in e-text.
p. 7, l. 2 of notes, for Houeshold read Household

Corrected in reprint.
p. 27, l. 418, Areyse. Compare, “and
the Geaunte pulled and drough, but he myght hym not a-race from
the sadell.” Merlin, Pt. II. p. 346 (E. E. T. Soc.
1866).
p. 35, note 3 (to l. 521), for end of this volume
read p. 145

Corrected in reprint.
p. 36, l. 536. Pepper. “The third thing is
Pepper, a sauce for vplandish folkes: for they mingle Pepper with
Beanes and Peason. Likewise of toasted bread with Ale or Wine, and with
Pepper, they make a blacke sauce, as if it were pap, that is called
pepper, and that they cast vpon theyr meat, flesh and fish.”
Reg. San. Salerni, p. 67.
p. 58, l. 851; p. 168, l. 13,
14. Green sauce. There is a herb of an acid taste, the common name for
which ... is green-sauce ... not a dozen miles from
Stratford-on-Avon. Notes & Queries, June 14, 1851, vol. iii.
p. 474. “of Persley leaues stamped withe veriuyce, or white wine,
is made a greene sauce to eate with roasted meat ... Sauce for
Mutton, Veale and Kid, is greene sauce, made in Summer with
Vineger or Verjuyce, with a few spices, and without Garlicke. Otherwise
with Parsley, white Ginger, and tosted bread with Vineger. In Winter,
the same sawces are made with many spices, and little quantity of
Garlicke, and of the best Wine, and with a little Verjuyce, or with
Mustard.” Reg. San. Salerni, p. 67-8.
p. 62, l. 909, ? perhaps a comma
should go after hed, and ‘his cloak or cape’ as a
side-note. But see cappe, p. 65, l. 964.
p. 66, l. 969. Dogs. The nuisance
that the number of Dogs must have been may be judged of by the following
payments in the Church-Wardens’ Accounts of St Margaret’s, Westminster,
in Nichols, p. 34-5.


1625
Item paid to the dog-killer for killing of dogs

0.   9.   8.


1625
Item paid to the dog-killer more for killing 14 dozen and 10 dogs
in time of visitacion

1.   9.   8.


1625
Item paid to the dog-killer for killing of 24 dozen of dogs

1.   8.


See the old French satire on the Lady and her Dogs, in Rel.
Ant. i. 155.
xcviii
 

p. 67, last line of note, for Hoss read Hog’s

Corrected in reprint.
p. 71, side-note 12, for King’s read chief

Corrected in reprint.
p. 84, note to l. 51. Chipping or
paring bread. “Non comedas crustam, colorem quia gignit adustam
... the Authour in this Text warneth vs, to beware of crusts eating,
because they ingender a-dust cholor, or melancholly humours, by reason
that they bee burned and dry. And therefore great estates the which be
[orig. the] chollerick of nature, cause the crustes aboue and
beneath to be chipped away; wherfore the pith or crumme should be
chosen, the which is of a greater nourishment then the crust.”
Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, ed. 1634, p. 71. Fr.
chapplis, bread-chippings. Cotgrave.
p. 85, note to l. 98,
Trencher, should be to l. 52.

Line number corrected in reprint; note moved in e-text.
p. 91, last note, on l. 177, should be on l. 77.

See above under “p. 6”.
p. 92, l. 6, goddes good.
This, and barme, and bargood (= beer-good) are only
equivalents for ‘yeast.’ Goddes-good was so called ‘because it cometh of
the grete grace of God’: see the following extract, sent me by Mr
Gillett, from the Book of the Corporate Assembly of Norwich, 8
Edw. IV.:
“The Maior of this Cite commaundeth on the Kynges bihalve,
yt alle maner of Brewers yt shall brewe to
sale wtynne this Cite, kepe ye assise accordyn to
ye Statute, & upon peyne ordeyned. And wheras berme,
otherwise clepid goddis good, wtoute tyme of mynde hath frely
be goven or delyvered for brede, whete, malte, egges, or other
honest rewarde, to ye valewe only of a ferthyng at
ye uttermost, & noon warned, bicause it cometh of
ye grete grace of God, Certeyn persons of this Cite,
callyng themselves common Brewers, for their singler lucre &
avayll have nowe newely bigonne to take money for their seid goddis
good, for ye leest parte thereof, be it never so litle and
insufficient to serve the payer therefore, an halfpeny or a peny,
& ferthermore exaltyng ye price of ye
seid Goddis good at their proper will, ageyns the olde
& laudable custome of alle Englande, & specially of this
Cite, to grete hurte & slaunder of ye same Cite.
Wherefore it is ordeyned & provided, That no maner of brewer
of this Cite shall from this time foorth take of eny person for
lyvering, gevyng, or grauntyng of ye sd goddis
good, in money nor other rewarde, above ye valewe of a
ferthyng. He shall, for no malice feyned ne sought, colour, warne, ne
restregne ye sd goddis good to eny persone
yt will honestly & lefully aske it, & paye therefore
ye valewe of a ferthyng, &c.”
p. 161, l. 4. Flawnes. ‘Pro Caseo
ad flauns qualibet die . panis j’ (allowance of). Register of
Worcester Priory, fol. 121 a. ed. Hale, 1865.
p. 296, col. 2,
Clof. Can it be “cloth”?

The citation is the Index entry for a word occurring on p. 192.
p. 181, l. 144, Croscrist. La Croix de
par Dieu. The Christs-crosse-row; or, the hornebooke wherein a child
learnes it. Cotgrave. The alphabet was called the
Christ-cross-row, some say because a cross was prefixed to the
alphabet in the old primers; but as probably from a superstitious custom
of writing the alphabet in the form of a cross, by way of charm. This
was even solemnly practised by the bishop in the consecration of a
church. See Picart’s Religious Ceremonies, vol. i. p. 131.
Nares.
p. 185, l. 267, for be, falle, read be-falle (it
befalls, becomes)
p. 189, l. 393, side-note, Hall,
should be Hall. Fires in Hall lasted to Cena Domini, the
Thursday before Easter: see l. 398. Squires’ allowances of lights
ended on Feb. 2, I suppose. These lights, or candle of
l. 839, would be only part of the allowances. The rest would
continue all the year. See Household Ordinances & North. Hous.
Book. Dr Rock says that the holyn or holly and erbere
grene refer to the change on Easter Sunday described in the Liber
Festivalis:—“In die paschẽ. Good friends ye shall know well
that this day
xcix
 

is called in many places God’s Sunday. Know well that it is the manner
in every place of worship at this day to do the fire out of the
hall; and the black winter brands, and all thing that is foul with
smoke shall be done away, and there the fire was, shall be gaily arrayed
with fair flowers, and strewed with green rushes all about, showing a
great ensample to all Christian people, like as they make clean their
houses to the sight of the people, in the same wise ye should cleanse
your souls, doing away the foul brenning (burning) sin of lechery; put
all these away, and cast out all thy smoke, dusts; and strew in your
souls flowers of faith and charity, and thus make your souls able to
receive your Lord God at the Feast of Easter.” —Rock’s Church
of the Future, v. iii. pt. 2, p. 250. “The holly, being an
evergreen, would be more fit for the purpose, and makes less litter,
than the boughs of deciduous trees. I know some old folks in
Herefordshire who yet follow the custom, and keep the grate filled with
flowers and foliage till late in the autumn.” —D. R. On
Shere-Thursday, or Cena Domini, Dr Rock quotes from the Liber
Festivalis—“First if a man asked why Sherethursday is called
so, ye may say that in Holy Church it is called ‘Cena Domini,’ our
Lord’s Supper Day; for that day he supped with his disciples openly....
It is also in English called Sherethursday; for in old fathers’ days the
people would that day sheer their heads and clip their beards, and poll
their heads, and so make them honest against Easter-day.” —Rock,
ib., p. 235.
p. 192, l. 462-4, cut out
. after hete; put ; after sett, and , after
let; l. 468-9, for sett, In syce, read sett In syce;
l. 470, ? some omission
after this line.
p. 200, l. 677, side-note,
steel spoon is more likely spoon handle
p. 215, l. 14. The T of T
the is used as a paragraph mark in the MS.
p. 274, l. 143-4, ? sense, reading
corrupt.
p. 275, Lowndes calls the original of
Stans Puer ad Mensam the Carmen Juvenile of Sulpitius.
p. 312, col. 2, Holyn.
Bosworth gives A.S. holen, a rush; Wright’s Vocab.,
holin, Fr. hous; and that Cotgrave glosses ‘The Hollie,
Holme, or Huluer tree.’ Ancren Riwle, 418 note *, and Rel.
Ant., ii. 280, have it too. See Stratmann’s Dict.
In General Index.
p. 317, col. 2, The
extract for Lopster should have been under creuis or
crao.
In General Index.
p. 318, col. 1, Lorely may
be lorel-ly, like a lorel, a loose, worthless fellow,
a rascal.
In General Index.
p. 339, col. 1, Syles
is strains. Sile, v., to
strain, to purify milk through a straining dish; Su.-Got. sila,
colare.—Sile, s.,
a fine sieve or milk strainer; Su.-Got. sil, colum.
Brockett. See quotations in Halliwell’s Gloss., and Stratmann, who gives
Swed. sîla, colare.
In General Index.
On the general subject of diet in olden time consult “Regimen
Sanitatis Salernitanum, with an Introduction by Sir Alex. Croke, Oxford,
1830.” H. B. Wheatley. On manners, consult Liber Metricus Faceti
Morosi. J. E. Hodgkin.




Collected Sidenotes

This section was added by the transcriber. It contains the editor’s
summaries as given in his sidenotes, and can be read as a condensed
version of the full text.



John Russell’s Boke Of Nurture
Lawrens Andrewe on Fish
Wilyam Bulleyn on Boxyng and
Neckeweede
Andrew Borde on Sleep, Rising, and
Dress
William Vaughan’s Fifteen Directions to
preserve Health
Harington: The Dyet for every Day
Harington: On Rising, Diet, and Going to
Bed
Wynkyn de Worde’s Boke of Keruynge
The Boke of Curtasye
Bp. Grossetest’s Household
Statutes
Stanzas and Couplets of Counsel
The Schoole of Vertue
Whate-ever thow sey, avyse thee
welle!
A Dogg Lardyner, & a Sowe
Gardyner
Roger Ascham’s Advice to Lord Warwick’s
Servant
The Babees Book
Lerne or be Lewde
Vrbanitatis
The Lytylle Childrenes Lytil Boke, or
Edyllys be
The Young Children’s Book
Stans Puer ad Mensam
Ffor to serve a Lord, with A Feste for a Bryde
Latin GracesSymon’s Lesson of Wysedome for all maner Chyldryn
The Birched School-Boy



 


Russell’s Boke of Nurture
In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God keep me! I am an
Usher to a Prince, and delight in teaching the inexperienced.
It is charitable to teach ignorant youths.
If any such won’t learn, give them a toy.
One May I went to a forest, and by the Forester’s leave walked in the
woodland, where I saw three herds of deer in the sunshine.
A young man with a bow was going to stalk them, but I asked him to
walk with me, and inquired whom he served.
‘No one but myself, and I wish I was out of this world.’
‘Good son, despair is sin; tell me what the matter is. When the pain
is greatest the cure is nearest!’
‘Sir, I’ve tried everywhere for a master; but because I know nothing,
no one will take me.’
‘Will you learn if I’ll teach you? What do you want to be?’
‘A Butler, Sir, Panter, Chamberlain, and Carver. Teach me the duties
of these.’
‘I will, if you’ll love God and be true to your master.’
A Panter or Butler must have three knives:

1 to chop loaves, 1 to pare them, 1 to smooth the trenchers.
Give your Sovereign new bread, others one-day-old bread; for the
house, three-day bread; for trenchers four-day bread; Have your salt
white, and your salt-planer of ivory, two inches broad, three long.
Have your table linen sweet and clean, your knives bright, spoons
well washed, two wine-augers some box taps, a broaching gimlet, a pipe
and bung.
To broach a pipe, pierce it with an auger or gimlet, four fingers-
breadth over the lower rim, so that the dregs may not rise.
Serve Fruit according to the season, figs, dates, quince-marmalade,
ginger, &c.
Before dinner, plums and grapes after, pears, nuts, and hard
cheese.
After supper, roast apples, &c.
In the evening don’t take cream, strawberries, or junket, unless you
eat hard cheese with them.
Hard cheese keeps your bowels open.
Butter is wholesome in youth and old age, anti-poisonous, and
aperient.
Milk, Junket, Posset, &c., are binding.
Eat hard cheese after them.
Beware of green meat; it weakens your belly.
For food that sets your teeth on edge, eat almonds and cheese, but
not more than half an ounce.
If drinks have given you indigestion, eat a raw apple.
Moderation is best sometimes, at others abstinence.
Look every night that your wines don’t ferment or leak Always carry a
gimlet, adze, and linen cloths; and wash the heads of the pipes with
cold water.
If the wine boil over, put to it the lees of red wine, and that will
cure it.
Romney will bring round sick sweet wine.
The names of Sweet Wines.
Recipe for making Ypocras.
Take spices thus, Cinnamon, &c., long Pepper.
Have three basins and three straining-bags to them; hang ’em on a
perch.
Let your ginger be well pared, hard, not worm-eaten, (Colombyne is
better than Valadyne or Maydelyne); your sticks of Cinnamon thin, hot
and sweet; Canel is not so good.
Cinnamon is hot and dry, Cardamons are hot and moist.
Take sugar or sugar candy, red wine, graines, ginger, pepper,
cinnamon, spice, and turnesole, and put each powder in a bladder by
itself.
Hang your straining-bags so that they mayn’t touch,--first bag a
gallon, others a pottle.
Put the powders in two or three gallons of red wine; then into the
runner, the second bag, (tasting and trying it now and then), and the
third vessel.
If it’s not right, add cinnamon, ginger, or sugar, as wanted.
If it’s not right, add cinnamon, ginger, or sugar, as wanted.
Mind you keep tasting it.
Strain it through bags of fine cloth, hooped at the mouth, the first
holding a gallon, the others a pottle, and each with a basin under
it.
The Ypocras is made.
Use the dregs in the kitchen.
Put the Ypocras in a tight clean vessel, and serve it with
wafers.
The Buttery.
Keep all cups, &c., clean.
Don’t serve ale till it’s five days old.
Be civil and obliging, and give no one stale drink.
To lay the cloth, &c.
Wipe the table.
Put a cloth on it (a cowche); you take one end, your mate the other;
lay the fold of the second cloth(?) on the outer edge of the table, that
of the third cloth(?) on the inner.
Cover your cupboard with a diaper towel, put one round your neck, one
side on your left arm with your sovereign’s napkin; on that, eight
loaves to eat, and three or four trencher loaves: in your left the
salt-cellar.
In your right hand, spoons and knives.
Put the Salt on the right of your lord; on its left, a trencher or
two; on their left, a knife, then white rolls, and beside them a spoon
folded in a napkin.
Cover all up.
At the other end set a Salt and two trenchers.
How to wrap up your lord’s bread in a stately way.
Cut your loaves all equal.
Take a towel two and a half yards long by the ends, fold up a handful
from each end, and in the middle of the folds lay eight loaves or buns,
bottom to bottom; put a wrapper on the top, twist the ends of the towel
together, smooth your wrapper, and quickly open the end of it before
your lord.
After your lord’s lay the other tables.
Deck your cupboard with plate, your washing-table with basins,
&c.
Have plenty of napkins, &c., and your pots clean.
Make the Surnape with a cloth under a double napkin.
Fold the two ends of your towel, and one of the cloth, a foot over,
and lay it smooth for your lord to wash with.
The marshal must slip it along the table, and pull it smooth.
Then raise the upper part of the towel, and lay it even, so that the
Sewer (arranger of dishes) may make a state.
When your lord has washed, take up the Surnape with your two arms,
and carry it back to the Ewery.
Carry a towel round your neck.
Uncover your bread; see that all diners have knife, spoon, and
napkin.
Bow when you leave your lord.
Take eight loaves from the bread-cloth, and put four at each end.
Lay for as many persons as the Sewer has set potages for, and have
plenty of bread and drink.
Be lively and soft-spoken, clean and well dressed.
Don’t spit or put your fingers into cups.
Stop all blaming and backbiting, and prevent complaints.
General Directions for Behaviour.
Don’t claw your back as if after a flea; or your head, as if after a
louse.
See that your eyes are not blinking and watery.
Don’t pick your nose, or let it drop, or blow it too loud, or twist
your neck.
Don’t claw your cods, rub your hands, pick your ears, retch, or spit
too far.
Don’t tell lies, or squirt with your mouth, gape, pout, or put your
tongue in a dish to pick dust out.
Don’t cough, hiccup, or belch, straddle your legs, or scrub your
body.
Don’t pick your teeth, cast stinking breath on your lord, fire your
stern guns, or expose your codware before your master.
Many other improprieties a good servant will avoid.’
‘Sir, pray teach me how to carve, handle a knife, and cut up birds,
fish, and flesh.’
‘Hold your knife tight, with two fingers and a thumb, in your
midpalm.
Do your carving, lay your bread, and take off trenchers, with two
fingers and thumb.
Never touch others’ food with your right hand, but only with the
left.
Don’t dirty your table or wipe your knives on it.
Take a loaf of trenchers, and with the edge of your knife raise a
trencher, and lay it before your lord; lay four trenchers four-square,
and another on the top.
Take a loaf of light bread, pare the edges, cut the upper crust for
your lord, and don’t touch it after it’s trimmed.
Keep your table clean.
Indigestibilities.
You must know what meat is indigestible, and what sauces are
wholesome.
These things are indigestible: Fat and Fried, Raw and Resty, Salt and
Sour, also sinews, skin, hair, feathers, crops, heads, pinions, &c.,
legs, outsides of thighs, skins; these destroy your lord’s rest.’
‘Thanks, father, I’ll put your teaching into practice, and pray for
you.
But please tell me how to carve fish and flesh.’
Carving of Meat.
Cut brawn on the dish, and lift slices off with your knife;
serve it with mustard.
Venison with furmity.
Touch Venison only with your knife, pare it, cross it with 12
scores, cut a piece out, and put it in the furmity soup.
Touch with your left hand, pare it clean, put away the sinews,
&c.
Partridges, &c.: take up by the pinion, and mince them
small in the sirrup.
Larger roast birds, as the Osprey, &c., raise up [? cut
off] the legs, then the wings, lay the body in the middle, with the
wings and legs round it, in the same dish.
Capons: take off the wings and legs; pour on ale or wine,
mince them into the flavoured sauce.
Give your lord the left wing, and if he want it, the right one
too.
Pheasants, &c.: take off the wings, put them in the dish,
then the legs.
Woodcocks, Heronshaws, Brew, &c.
break the pinions, neck, and beak.
Cut off the legs, then the wings, lay the body between them.
Crane: take off the wings, but not the trompe in his
breast.
Peacocks, &c.: carve like you do the Crane, keeping their
feet on.
Quails, larks, pigeons: give your lord the legs first.
Fawn: serve the kidney first, then a rib.
Pick the fyxfax out of the neck.
Pig:

1. shoulder,
2. rib.

Rabbit: lay him on his back; pare off his skin; break his
haunch bone, cut him down each side of the back, lay him on his belly,
separate the sides from the chine, put them together again, cutting out
the nape of the neck; give your lord the sides.
Sucking rabbits: cut in two, then the hind part in two; pare the skin
off, serve the daintiest bit from the side.
Such is the way of carving gross meats.
Cut each piece into four slices (?) for your master to dip in his
sauce.
Of large birds’ wings, put only three bits at once in the sauce.
Of small birds’ wings, scrape the flesh to the end of the bone, and
put it on your lord’s trencher.
How to carve Baked Meats.
Open hot ones at the top of the crust, cold ones in the middle.
Take Teal, &c., out of their pie, and mince their wings, stir the
gravy in; your lord may eat it with a spoon.
Cut Venison, &c., in the pasty.
Custard: cut in squares with a knife.
Dowcets: pare away the sides; serve in a sawcer.
Payne-puff: pare the bottom, cut off the top.
Fried things are indigestible.
Poached-egg (?) fritters are best.
Tansey is good hot.
Don’t eat Leessez.
Cooks are always inventing new dishes that tempt people and endanger
their lives: Syrups Comedies, Jellies, that stop the bowels.
Some dishes are prepared with unclarified honey.
Cow-heels and Calves’ feet are sometimes mixed with unsugared leches
and Jellies.
Furmity with venison, mortrewes, jussell, &c., are good.
Other out-of-the-way soups set aside.
Such is a flesh feast in the English way.
Sauces.
Sauces provoke a fine appetite.
Have ready Mustard for brawn, &c.,
Verjuice for veal, &c.,
Chawdon for cygnet and swan, Garlic, &c., for beef and goose,
Ginger for fawn, &c.,
Mustard and sugar for pheasant, &c.,
Gamelyn for heronsew, &c.,
Sugar and Salt for brew, &c.,
Gamelyn for bustard, &c.,
Salt and Cinnamon for woodcock, thrushes, &c., and quails,
&c.
How to carve Fish.
With pea soup or furmity serve a Beaver’s tail, salt Porpoise,
&c.
Split up Herrings, take out the roe and bones, eat with mustard.
Take the skin off salt fish, Salmon, Ling, &c., and let the sauce
be mustard, but for Mackarel, &c., butter of Claynes or Hackney (?)
Of Pike, the belly is best, with plenty of sauce.
Salt Lampreys, cut in seven gobbets, pick out the backbones, serve
with onions and galentine.
Plaice: cut off the fins, cross it with a knife, sauce with wine,
&c.
Gurnard, Chub, Roach, Dace, Cod, &c., split up and spread on the
dish.
Soles, Carp, &c., take off as served.
Whale, porpoise, congur, turbot, Halybut, &c., cut in the dish,
and also Tench in jelly.
On roast Lamprons cast vinegar, &c., and bone them.
Crabs are hard to carve: break every claw, put all the meat in the
body-shell, and then season it with vinegar or verjuice and
powder.
(?) Heat it, and give it to your lord.
Put the claws, broken, in a dish.
The sea Crayfish: cut it asunder, slit the belly of the back part,
take out the fish, clean out the gowt in the middle of the sea
Crayfish’s back; pick it out, tear it off the fish, and put vinegar to
it; break the claws and set them on the table.
Treat the back like the crab, stopping both ends with bread.
The fresh-water Crayfish: serve with vinegar and powder.
Salt Sturgeon: slit its joll, or head, thin.
Whelk: cut off its head and tail, throw away its operculum, mantle,
&c., cut it in two, and put it on the sturgeon, adding vinegar.
Carve Baked Lampreys thus: take off the piecrust, put thin slices of
bread on a Dish, pour galentyne over the bread, add cinnamon and red
wine.
Mince the lampreys, lay them on the sauce, &c., on a hot plate,
serve up to your lord.
White herrings fresh; the roe must be white and tender serve with
salt and wine.
Shrimps picked, lay them round a sawcer, and serve with vinegar.”
“Thanks, father, I know about Carving now, but I hardly dare ask you
about a Sewer’s duties, how he is to serve.”
The Duties of a Sewer.
“Son, since you wish to learn, I will gladly teach you.
Let the Sewer, as soon as the Master begins to say grace, hie to the
kitchen.
I. Ask the Panter for fruits (as butter, grapes, &c.), if they
are to be served.
II. Ask the cook and Surveyor what dishes are prepared.
III. Let the Cook serve up the dishes, the Surveyor deliver them and
you, the Sewer, have skilful officers to prevent any dish being
stolen.
IV. Have proper servants, Marshals, &c., to bring the dishes from
the kitchen.
V. You set them on the table yourself.
A Meat Dinner.
First Course.

1. Mustard and brawn.
2. Potage.
3. Stewed Pheasant and Swan, &c.
4. Baked Venison.
5. A Device of Gabriel greeting Mary.

Second Course.

1. Blanc Mange (of Meat).
2. Roast Venison, &c.
3. Peacocks, heronsew, egrets, sucking rabbits, larks, bream,
&c.
4. Dowcets, amber Leche, poached fritters.
5. A Device of an Angel appearing to three Shepherds on a hill.

Third Course.

1. Almond cream.
2. Curlews, Snipes, &c.
3. Fresh-water crayfish, &c.
4. Baked Quinces, Sage fritters, &c.
5. Devices: The Mother of Christ, presented by the Kings of
Cologne.

Dessert.
White apples, caraways, wafers and Ypocras.
Clear the Table.
A Fish Dinner.
First Course.

1. Minnows, &c.
2. Porpoise and peas.
3. Fresh Millwell.
4. Roast Pike.
5. A Divice: A young man piping on a cloud, and called
Sanguineus, or Spring.

Second Course.

1. Dates and Jelly,
2. Doree in Syrup,
3. Turbot, &c.
4. Eels, Fritters,
5. A Device: A Man of War, red and angry called Estas, or
Summer.

Third Course.

1. Almond Cream, &c.,
2. Sturgeon, Whelks, Minnows,
3. Shrimps, &c.,
4. Fritters.
5. A Device: A Man with a Sickle, tired, called Harvest.

Fourth Course.
Hot apples, Ginger, Wafers, Ypocras.
The last Device, Yemps or Winter, with grey locks, sitting on
a stone.
These Devices represent the Ages of Man:

Sanguineus, the 1st age, of pleasure.
Colericus, the 2nd, of quarrelling.
Autumpnus the 3rd, of melancholy.
Winter, the 4th, of aches and troubles.

These Devices give great pleasure, when shown in a house.
Inscriptions for the Devices.

Spring. Loving, laughing, singing, benign.
Summer. Prickly, angry, crafty, lean.
Autumn. Sleepy, dull, sluggish, fat, white-faced.
Winter. Envious, sad, timid, yellow-coloured.

A Franklin’s Feast.
Brawn, bacon and pease, beef and boiled chickens, roast goose, capon,
and custade.
Second Course.
Mortrewes, veal, rabbit, chicken, dowcettes, fritters, or leche,
spiced pears, bread and cheese, spiced cakes, bragot and mead.
Dinners on Fish-days.
Gudgeons, minnows, venprides (?) musclade (?) of almonds, oysters
dressed, porpoise or seal, pike cullis, jelly, dates, quinces, pears,
houndfish, rice, mameny.
If you don’t like these potages, taste them only.
Fish Sauces.
Mustard for salt herring, conger, mackerel, &c.
Vinegar for salt porpoise, swordfish, &c.
Sour wine for whale, with powder.
Wine for plaice.
Galantine for lamprey.
Verjuice for mullet.
Cinnamon for base, carp, and chub.
Garlic, verjuice, and pepper, for houndfish, stockfish, &c.
Vinegar, cinnamon, and ginger, for fresh-water crayfish, fresh
porpoise, sturgeon, &c.
Green Sauce for green fish (fresh ling): Mustard is best for every
dish.
Other sauces are served at grand feasts, but the above will please
familiar guests.”
“Fair fall you, father! You have taught me lovesomely; but please
tell me, too, the duties of a Chamberlain.”
The Chamberlain’s Duties.
He must be diligent, neatly dressed, clean-washed, careful of fire
and candle, attentive to his master, light of ear, looking out for
things that will please.
The Chamberlain must prepare for his lord a clean shirt, under and
upper coat and doublet, breeches, socks, and slippers as brown as a
water-leech.
In the morning, must have clean linen ready, warmed by a clear
fire.
When his lord rises, he gets ready the foot-sheet; puts a cushioned
chair before the fire, a cushion for the feet, and over all spreads the
foot-sheet: has a comb and kerchief ready, and then asks his lord to
come to the fire and dress while he waits by.

1. Give your master his under coat,
2. His doublet,
3. Stomacher well warmed,
4. Vampeys and socks,
5. Draw on his socks, breeches, and shoes,
6. Pull up his breeches,
7. Tie ’em up,
8. Lace his doublet,
9. Put a kerchief round his neck,
10. Comb his head with an ivory comb,
11. Give him warm water to wash with,
12. Kneel down and ask him what gown he’ll wear:
13. Get the gown,
14. Hold it out to him;
15. Get his girdle,
16. His Robe.
17. His hood or hat.
18. Before he goes brush him carefully.

Before your lord goes to church, see that his pew is made ready,
cushion, curtain, &c.
Return to his bedroom, throw off the clothes, beat the featherbed,
see that the fustian and sheets are clean.
Cover the bed with a coverlet, spread out the bench covers and
cushions, set up the headsheet and pillow, remove the urinal and basin,
lay carpets round the bed, and with others dress the windows and
cupboard, have a fire laid.
Keep the Privy sweet and clean, cover the boards with green cloth, so
that no wood shows at the hole; put a cushion there, and have some
blanket, cotton, or linen to wipe on; have a basin, jug, and towel,
ready for your lord to wash when he leaves the privy.
In the Wardrobe take care to keep the clothes well, and brush ’em
with a soft brush at least once a week, for fear of moths.
Look after your Drapery and Skinnery.
If your lord will take a nap after his meal, have ready kerchief,
comb, pillow and headsheet (don’t let him sleep too long), water and
towel.
When he goes to bed,

1. Spread out the footsheet,
2. Take off your lord’s Robe and put it away.
3. Put a cloak on his back,
4. Set him on his footsheet,
5. Pull off his shoes, socks, and breeches,
6. Throw the breeches over your arm,
7. Comb his head,
8. Put on his kerchief and nightcap,
9. Have the bed, and headsheet, &c., ready,
10. Draw the curtains,
11. Set the night-light,
12. Drive out dogs and cats,
13. Bow to your lord,
14. Keep the night-stool and urinal ready for whenever he calls, and
take it back when done with.

How to prepare a Bath.
Hang round the roof, sheets full of sweet herbs, have five or six
sponges to sit or lean on, and one great sponge to sit on with a sheet
over and a sponge under his feet.
Mind the door’s shut.
With a basinful of hot herbs, wash him with a soft sponge, throw
rose-water on him; let him go to bed.
Put his socks and slippers on, stand him on his footsheet, wipe him
dry, take him to bed to cure his troubles.
To make a Medicinal Bath.
Boil together hollyhock centaury, herb-benet, scabious, withy leaves;
throw them hot into a vessel, set your lord on it; let him bear it as
hot as he can, and whatever disease he has will certainly be cured, as
men say.
The Duties of an Usher and Marshal.
He must know the rank and precedence of all people.
I.

1. The Pope.
2. Emperor.
3. King.
4. Cardinal.
5. Prince.
6. Archbishop.
7. Royal Duke.

II. Bishop, &c.
III.

1. Viscount.
2. Mitred abbot.
3. Three Chief Justices.
4. Mayor of London.

IV. (The Knight’s rank.)

1. Cathedral Prior, Knight Bachelor.
2. Dean, Archdeacon.
3. Master of the Rolls.
4. Puisné Judge.
5. Clerk of the Crown.
6. Mayor of Calais.
7. Doctor of Divinity.
8. Prothonotary.
9. Pope’s Legate.

V. (The Squire’s rank.)

1. Doctor of Laws.
2. Ex-Mayor of London.
3. Serjeant of Law.
4. Masters of Chancery.
5. Preacher.
6. Masters of Arts.
7. Other Religious.
8. Parsons and Vicars.
9. Parish Priests.
10. City Bailiffs.
11. Serjeant at Arms.
12. Heralds (the chief Herald has first place),
13. Merchants,
14. Gentlemen,
15. Gentlewomen may all eat with squires.

I have now told you the rank of every class, and now I’ll tell you
how they may be grouped at table.
I. Pope, King, Prince, Archbishop and Duke.
II. Bishop, Marquis, Viscount, Earl.
III. The Mayor of London, Baron, Mitred Abbot, three Chief Justices,
Speaker, may sit together, two or three at a mess.
IV. The other ranks (three or four to a mess) equal to a Knight,
unmitred Abbot, Dean, Master of the Rolls, under Judges, Doctor of
Divinity, Prothonotary, Mayor of Calais.
V. Other ranks equal to a Squire, four to a mess.
Serjeants of Law, ex-Mayor of London, Masters of Chancery, Preachers
and Parsons, Apprentices of Law, Merchants and Franklins.
Each estate or rank shall sit at meat by itself, not seeing
another.
The Bishop of Canterbury shall be served apart from the Archbishop of
York, and the Metropolitan alone.
The Bishop of York must not eat before the Primate of England.
Sometimes a Marshal is puzzled by Lords of royal blood being poor,
and others not royal being rich; also by a Lady of royal blood marrying
a knight, and vice versâ.
The Lady of royal blood shall keep her rank; the Lady of low blood
shall take her husband’s rank.
Property is not so worthy as royal blood, so the latter prevails over
the former, for royal blood may become King.
The parents of a Pope or Cardinal must not presume to equality with
their son, and must not want to sit by him, but in a separate room.
A Marshal must look to the rank of every estate, and do honour to
foreign visitors and residents.
A well-trained Marshal should think beforehand where to place
strangers at the table.
If the King sends any messenger to your Lord receive him one degree
higher than his rank.
The King’s groom may dine with a Knight or Marshal, A Marshal must
also understand the rank of County and Borough officers, and that a
Knight of blood and property is above a poor Knight, the Mayor of London
above the Mayor of Queenborough, the Abbot of Westminster above the poor
Abbot of Tintern, the Prior of Canterbury above the Prior of Dudley, the
Prior who is Prelate of a Cathedral Church above any Abbot or Prior of
his diocese, a Doctor of 12 years’ standing above one of 9 (though the
latter be the richer), the old Aldermen above the young ones, and

1. the Master of a craft,
2. the ex-warden.

Before every feast, then, think what people are coming, and settle
what their order of precedence is to be.
If in doubt, ask your lord or the chief officer, and then you’ll do
wrong to no one, but set all according to their birth and dignity.
Now I have told you of Court Manners, how to manage in Pantry,
Buttery, Carving, and as Sewer, and Marshal, as I learnt with a Royal
Prince whose Usher and Marshal I was.
All other officers have to obey me.
Our office is the chief, whether the Cook likes it or not.
All these offices may be filled by one man, but a Prince’s dignity
requires each office to have its officer, and a servant under him, (all
knowing their duties perfectly) to wait on their Lord and please his
guests.
Don’t fear to serve a prince; take good heed to your duties, watch,
and you need not fear.
Tasting is done only for those of royal blood, as a Pope,
King, Duke, and Earl: not below.
Tasting is done for fear of poison; therefore keep your room secure,
and close your safe, for fear of tricks.
A Prince’s Steward and Chamberlain have the oversight of all offices
and of tasting, and they must tell the Marshal, Sewer, and Carver how to
do it.
I don’t propose to write more on this matter.
I tried this treatise myself, in my youth, and enjoyed these matters,
but now age compels me to leave the court; so try yourself.”
“Blessing on you, Father, for this your teaching of me! Now I shall
dare to serve where before I was afraid. I will try, and shall learn by
practice. May God reward you for teaching me!”
“Good son, and all readers of this Boke of Nurture, pray for
the soul of me, John Russell, (servant of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester;)
also for the Duke, my wife, father, and mother, that we may all go to
bliss when we die.”
Little book, commend me to all learners, and to the experienced, whom
I pray to correct its faults.
Any such, put to my copying, which I have done as I best could.
The transcriber is not to blame; he copied what was before him, and
neither of us wrote it, I only corrected the rhyme.
God! grant us grace to rule in Heaven with Thine elect!

Andrewe, Extracts on Fish
Eel. Is of no sex; is best roasted.
Herring. Is delicious when fresh, or salted. Dies when it
feels the air.
Whale? Shipmen cast anchor on him, and make a fire on him. He
swims away, and drowns them.
Ahuna. When the Ahuna is in danger, he puts his head in his
belly, and eats a bit of himself.
Balena. (The woodcut is a big Merman. ? Whale.) Are seen most
in winter; breed in summer. In rough weather Balena puts her young in
her mouth.
Crevice (Sea and Fresh Water Crayfish). How they engender, and
hybernate. How the Crayfish manages to eat Oysters.
Fresh-Water Crayfish is hard to digest.
Carp. Is difficult to net.
Whale. Likes Harmony. Gets harpooned, rubs the harpoon into
himself, and slays himself.
Phocas. Kills his wife and gets another.
Halata. Takes her young out of her womb to look at ’em.
Pike: eats venomous beasts; is begotten by a West Wind.
Sea-Mouse Musculus is the cock of Balena.
Lamprey. Must be boiled in wine.
Mulus: has 2 beards.
Orchun. Is Balene’s deadly enemy.
Pecten: winks.
Pinna. How he catches small fishes.
Serra. Cuts through ships with his fins.
Siren. Siren is like an eagle below, sings sweet songs to mariners,
and tears them to pieces.
Sturgeon. Eats no food, has no mouth, grows fat on east wind.
Has no bones in his body.

Wilyam Bulleyn on Boxyng & Neckeweede
For saucy louts, the best cure is Boxing.
The names of Hemp.
Neckweed (a halter) is good for thievish apprentices, for
swashbucklers past grace, and all scamps.
Also for young spendthrifts who after their parents’ death waste
their all with harlots and in gambling which makes men beggars, or
thieves.
A life of reckless debauchery and robbery ends with Hemp.
The use of Hemp to the Sailor, Plowman, Fisher and Archer.

Andrew Borde on Sleep, Rising, and Dress
After Dinner, sleep standing against a cupboard.
Before bedtime be merry.
Have a fire in your bedroom, but stand a good way off it.
Shut your windows.
Lie first on your left side.
To sleep groveling on the belly, is bad; on the back upright, is
worse.
Wear a scarlet nightcap.
Have a flock bed over your featherbed.
On rising, remember God, brush your breeches, put on your hose,
stretch, go to stool.
Truss your points, comb your head, wash your hands and face, take a
stroll, pray to God.
Play at tennis, or wield weights.
At meals, eat only of 2 or 3 dishes; let supper-dishes be light.
Wear a scarlet petycote.
Line a jacket with white and black lambskin sewn diamond-wise.
Keep your neck warm.
Wear goatskin gloves.
Don’t stand long on grass or stones.
Don’t sleep in ratty rooms.
Don’t take cold in your feet.

William Vaughan’s Fifteen Directions to preserve Health
1. Stretch yourself.
2. Rub yourself.
3. Go to stool.
4. Put on your clothes.
5. Comb your head.
6. Clean your teeth.

(How to keep the teeth sound and the breath sweet. Use Vaughan’s Water
made after this recipe. It’s better than 1000 Dentrifices.)
7. Wash. The best remedy for dim sight.
8. Say your Prayers.
9. Set to work. Be honest.
10. Eat only three meals a day. Eat light food before heavy. Drink
hinders digestion. Use silver cups.
11. Don’t work directly after meals, but talk, wash, and clean your
teeth.
12. Undress by the fire in winter.
13. Before bed, chew Mastic, and
14. Pray to God. Look at your water in a Urinal. Have a hole in your
nightcap.
15. Against rheums, eat white pepper.

Harington, The Dyet for every Day.
Stretch your limbs, rub your body and head; protect yourself from
cold;
dress, washing in Summer, warming yourself in Winter.
In Summer wear deer’s and calves’ skins, in Winter, wolf and fox
skins.
Comb your head 40 times, wash your face, clean your eyelids, rub your
neck well.

Harington, On Rising, Diet, and Going to Bed.
On rising, empty your bladder and belly, nose and lungs.
Cleanse your whole body.
Say your Prayers.
Walk gently, go to stool.
Work in the forenoon.
Always wear a precious stone in a ring; hold a crystal in your mouth;
for the virtue of precious stones is great.
Eat only twice a day.
Don’t drink between dinner and supper.
Don’t have one fixed hour for your meals.
In Winter eat in hot well-aired places.
Fast for a day now and then.
Eat more at supper than dinner.
After meals, wash your face, and clean your teeth, chat and walk
soberly.
Don’t sit up late.
Before bed, rub your body gently.
Undress by a fire in Winter, and warm your garments well Put off your
cares with your clothes, and take them up again in the morning.

The Boke of Keruynge
The Book of Carving and Arranging; and the Dishes for all the Feasts
in the year.
Terms of a Carver:
Slice brawn, spoil a hen, unbrace a mallard, untache a curlew, border
a pasty, thigh small birds, splat a pike, fin a chub, barb a
lobster.
The Butler has 3 knives:

1. a squarer, 2. a chipper, 3. a smoother.
Trencher-bread must be 4 days old; the Salt-Planer of ivory; table
cloths kept in a chest, or hung on a perch.
To broach a Pipe, have 2 augers, funnels, and tubes, and pierce the
Pipe 4 inches from the bottom.
Always have ready fruits and hard cheese.
Beware of cow cream.
Hard cheese is aperient, and keeps off poison.
Milk and Junket close the Maw.
For food that sets your teeth on edge, eat an almond and hard
cheese.
A raw apple will cure indigestion.
See every night that your wines don’t boil over or leak.
You’ll know their fermenting by their hissing.
Names of Wines
Campolet, Rhenish, &c
To make Ypocras.
Take spices; put 6 bags on a perch, 6 pewter basins under, ginger and
cinnamon.
(Of the qualities of spices.) Pound each spice separately, put ’em in
bladders, and hang ’em in your bags, add a gallon of red wine to ’em,
stir it well, run it through two bags, taste it, pass it through 6
runners, and put it in a close vessel.
Keep the dregs for cooking.
Have your Compost clean, and your ale 5 days old, but not dead.
To lay the Cloth.
Put on a couch, then a second cloth, the fold on the outer
edge; a third, the fold on the inner edge.
Cover your cupboard, put a towel round your neck, one side lying on
your left arm; on that, 7 loaves of eating bread and 4 trencher
loaves.
In your left hand a saltcellar, in your right the towel.
Set the saltcellar on your lord’s right, and trenchers on the left of
it.
Lay knives, bread, spoons, napkins, and cover ’em up.
To wrap your Lord’s bread stately.
Square the loaves; take a Reynes towel 2½ yards long by the ends; put
it on the table, pinch up a handful of one end, and lay it between 2
towels, and on it lay your 6 or 7 loaves bottom to bottom.
Put salt, cups, &c., on the other tables.
See that your Ewery is properly supplied, and your ale-pots
kept clean.
To arrange the Surnape.
Put a cloth under a double towel, hold 3 ends together, fold them in
a foot-broad pleat, and lay it smooth.
After washing, the Marshal must carry the surnape out.
Leave out half a yard to make estate.
When your lord has washed, remove the Surnape.
When he is seated, salute him, uncover your bread, kneel on your knee
till 8 loaves are served out (?) Provide as many cups as dishes.
The Sewer or arranger of dishes must ascertain what dishes and
fruits are prepared daily for dinner; and he must have people ready to
carry up the dishes.
The Succession of Dishes.

1. Brawn, &c.
2. Pheasant, &c.
3. Meat Fritters, &c
4. For a standard, a peacock with his tail.
5. Doucettes, Paynpuff, Brew, Snipe, Petyperuys and Fayge,
Caraways, &c.

Clear the table
Keruynge of Flesshe.
Your hands must be clean; only two fingers and a thumb should be put
on your knife, or on fish, flesh, or fowl.
Wipe your knife on your napkin.
Lay 4 trenchers for your lord, with 2 or 4 on them and the upper
crust of a fine loaf.
Give heed to what is indigestible, as resty, fat things, feathers,
heads, legs, &c.
Keruynge of Flesshe.
How to carve Brawn, Venison, (cut it in 12 bits and slice it into the
furmity,) Pheasant, Stockdoves, (mince the wings into the syrup,) Goose,
Teal, &c., (take off the legs and wings,) Capon, (mince the wing
with wine or ale,) Plover, Lapwing, Bittern, Egret.
How to carve a Crane, (mind the trump in his breast,) Shoveler,
Quail, Martins, Swallow, Fawn, Kid, Roast Venison, Cony, (lay him on his
belly with his two cut-off sides, on each side of him.)
Cut 4 strips to each bit of meat, for your lord to pick it up by.
Open hot Meat-Pies at the top; cold in the middle.
Cut Custards in inch blocks.
Doucettes, pare off sides and bottom.
Fritters hot are good, cold bad.
Tansey is good.
Jelly, Blanche Manger, Charlet, &c., are good, and no other
potages.
Sauces for all maner of Fowles.
Mustard for beef; Verjuice for boiled chickens; Cawdrons for swans;
Garlick, &c., for beef.
Ginger for lamb; Gamelyne for heronsewe, &c.; Salt, Sugar and
Water of Tame for brew, &c.
White salt for lapwings, &c.
Cinnamon and salt for thrushes &c.
The Dinner Courses from Easter to Whitsunday.
From Easter to Pentecost, set bread, trenchers and spoons:

6 or 8 trenchers for a great lord, 3 for one of low degree.
Then cut bread for eating.
For Easter-day Feast: First Course:
A Calf, boiled and blessed; boiled Eggs and green sauce; Potage, with
beef, saffron-stained Capons.
Second Course: Mameny, Pigeons, Chewets, Flawnes.
Supper: Chickens, Veal, roast Kid, Pigs’-Feet, a Tansey fried.
Green Sauces of sorrel or vines, for the first course.
Keruyng of all maner of Fowles.

How to carve a Capon. Sauce: green sauce or verjuice.
Swan. Chawdron is the sauce for him.
Pheasant. No sauce but Salt.
Partridge. Sauce for Partridges.
How to carve a Quail. Sauce: salt.
Crane. Sauce: ginger, mustard, vinegar, and salt.
Heron. Sauce as before.
Rittern. Salt, the sauce.
Egret. Salt, the sauce.
Curlew. Salt, as sauce.
Brew. Salt, as sauce.
Cony (or Rabbit.) Sauce: vinegar and ginger.
Sarcel or Teal.
Plover.
Snipe.
Woodcock.

Sauces for the Second Course.
First Course: Beef and Capons.
How to sauce and carve a Roast capon: lay him out as if ready to
fly.
Second Course: Potage, Charlet, young Geese, Payne Puff, &c.
How to carve a Goose.
Goose must be eaten with green garlic or verjuice.
Dinner Courses from the Nativity of St John the Baptist, (June
24,) to Michaelmas.
First Course: soups, vegetables, legs of Pork, &c.
Second Course: roast Mutton, glazed Pigeons, Fritters, &c.
Serve a Pheasant dry, with salt and ginger: a Heronsewe with salt and
powder (blanche?) Treat open-clawed birds like capons.
Dinner Courses from Michaelmas to Christmas.
First Course: legs of Pork, &c.
Second Course: Widgeon, Fieldfares, Chewets, Beef, with sauces
Gelopere and Pegyll.
Cut the skin off boiled meats.
Carve carefully for Ladies; they soon get angry.
Carve Goose and Swan like other birds.
The skin of cloven-footed birds is unwholsome; of whole-footed birds
wholesome, because the water washes all corruption out of ’em.
Chicken’s skin is not so pure, because their nature is not to enter
into the river.
River birds cleanse their foul stink in the river.
Take off the heads of all field birds, for they eat worms, toads, and
the like.
Sewynge of Fysshe.
First Course:
Musculade. Salens, &c., baked Gurnet.
Second Course:
Jelly, dates, &c. For a standard, Mullet, Chub, Seal, &c.
Third Course:
Bream, Perch, Whelks; and pears in sugar candy. Figs, dates capped with
minced ginger, &c.
All over! Clear the table.
Carving and Dressing of Fish
Put tails and livers in the pea broth and furmity.
How to carve Seal Turrentyne, baked Herring, white Herring, Green
Fish, Merling, Hake, Pike, salt Lamprey, Plaice.
Gurnard, Bream, Roach, Whiting, Codling.
Carp, Trout, Conger, Thornback, Halibut, Tench, and Crab.
How to dress and serve up a Crab.
How to dress and carve a Crayfish, a Joll of Sturgeon, a fresh
Lamprey, pasty. (sauce, Galentyne with red wine and powdered cinnamon.)
Fresh Herring, &c.
Sprats, Musculade in worts, Oysters.
Dates, pears, Mortrewes of Dogfish.
Sauces for Fish.
Mustard for Salmon, &c.; Vinegar for salt Whale, &c.;
Galentyne for Lamprey; Verjuice for Roach, &c.; Cinnamon for Chub,
&c.; Green Sauce for Halibut, &c.
The Duties of a Chamberlain.
He must be cleanly, and comb his hair; see to his Lord’s clothes, and
brush his hose; in the morning warm his shirt, and prepare his
footsheet; warm his petycote, &c.; put on his shoes, tie up his
hose, comb his head, wash his hands, put on the robe he orders.
Make ready his Closet in the Church or Chapel, then come home to his
Bed-chamber, take off the bed-clothes.
Make his lord’s bed again with clean sheets, and lay hangings round
the bed, and windows, &c.
Keep the privy clean, and the board covered with green cloth, and
provide down or cotton for wiping.
When he goes to bed, let him wash; put him on a mantle, take off his
shoes, &c.
Comb his head, put on his night-cap, draw the curtains round him,
drive out the dogs and cats, set the urinal near, and then take
leave.
Of the Marshal and Usher.
He must know the orders of precedence of all ranks.
A Cardinal before a Prince.
The Mayor of London ranks with the 3 Chief Justices.
The Knight’s equals.
The ex-Mayor of London.
The Esquire’s equals. Who must dine alone, who 2 together, who 2 or
3, who 3 or 4. The Marshall must know who are of royal blood, for that
has the reverence. He must take heed of the King’s officers, do honour
to strangers, and receive a Messenger from the King as if one degree
higher than he is, for a King’s groom may sit at a Knight’s table.

The Boke of Curtasye
In this book you may learn Courtesy. Every one needs it.
On reaching a Lord’s gate, give the Porter your weapon, and ask leave
to go in.
If the master is of low degree, he will come to you: if of high, the
Porter will take you to him.
At the Hall-door, take off your hood and gloves, greet the Steward,
&c., at the dais, bow to the Gentlemen on each side of the hall both
right and left; notice the yeomen, then stand before the screen till the
Marshal or Usher leads you to the table.
Be sedate and courteous if you are set with the gentlemen.
Cut your loaf in two, the top from the bottom; cut the top crust in
4, and the bottom in 3. cut the top crust in 4, and the bottom in 3.
Put your trencher before you, and don’t eat or drink till your Mess
is brought from the kitchen, lest you be thought starved or a
glutton.
Have your nails clean.
Don’t bite your bread, but break it.
Don’t quarrel at table, or make grimaces.
Don’t cram your cheeks out with food like an ape, for if any one
should speak to you, you can’t answer, but must wait.
Don’t eat on both sides of your mouth.
Don’t laugh with your mouth full, or sup up your potage noisily.
Don’t leave your spoon in the dish or on its side, but clean your
spoon.
Let no dirt off your fingers soil the cloth.
Don’t put into the dish bread that you have once bitten.
Dry your mouth before you drink.
Don’t call for a dish once removed, or spit on the table: that’s
rude.
Don’t scratch your dog.
If you blow your nose, clean your hand; wipe it with your skirt or
put it through your tippet.
Don’t pick your teeth at meals, or drink with food in your mouth, as
you may get choked, or killed, by its stopping your wind.
Tell no tale to harm or shame your companions.
Don’t stroke the cat or dog.
Don’t dirty the table cloth with your knife.
Don’t blow on your food, or put your knife in your mouth, or wipe
your teeth or eyes with the table cloth.
If you sit by a good man, don’t put your knee under his thigh.
Don’t hand your cup to any one with your back towards him.
Don’t lean on your elbow, or dip your thumb into your drink, or your
food into the salt cellar:
That is a vice.
Don’t spit in the basin you wash in or loosely (?) before a man of
God.
If you go to school you shall learn:

1. Cross of Christ,
2. Pater Noster,
3. Hail Mary and the Creed,
4. In the name of the Trinity,
5. of the Apostles,
6. the Confession.

Seek the kingdom of God, and worship Him.
At church, take holy water; pray for all Christian companions; kneel
to God on both knees, to man only on one.
At the Altar, serve the priest with both hands.
Speak gently to your father and mother, and honour them.
Do to others as you would they should do to you.
Don’t be foolishly meek.
The seed of the righteous shall never beg or be shamed.
Be ready forgive, and fond of peace.
If you cannot give an asker goods, give him good words.
Be willing to help every one.
Give your partner his fair share.
Go on the pilgrimages (?) you vow to saints, lest God take vengeance
on you.
Don’t believe all who speak fair: the Serpent spoke fair words (to
Eve).
Be cautious with your words, except when angry.
Don’t lie, but keep your word.
Don’t laugh too often, or you’ll be called a shrew or a fool.
Man’s 3 enemies are: the Devil, the Flesh, and the World.
Destroy these, and be sure of heaven.
Don’t strive with your lord, or bet or play with him.
In a strange place don’t be too inquisitive or fussy.
If a man falls, don’t laugh, but help him up: your own head may fall
to your feet.
At the Mass, if the priest doesn’t please you, don’t blame him.
Don’t tell your secrets to a shrew.
Don’t beckon, point, or whisper.
When you meet a man, greet him, or answer him cheerily if he greets
you:
don’t be dumb, lest men say you have no mouth.
Never speak improperly of women, for we and our fathers were all born
of women.
A wife should honour and obey her husband, and serve him.
Try to reconcile brothers if they quarrel.
At a gate, let your equal precede you; go behind your superior and
your master unless he bids you go beside him.
On a pilgrimage don’t be third man: 3 oxen can’t draw a plough.
Don’t drink all that’s in a cup offered you; take a little.
If you sleep with any man, ask what part of the bed he likes, and lie
far from him.
If you journey with any man, find out his name, who he is, where he
is going.
With friars on a pilgrimage, do as they do.
Don’t put up at a red (haired and faced) man or woman’s house.
Answer opponents meekly, but don’t tell lies.
Before your lord at table, keep your hands, feet, and fingers
still.
Don’t stare about, or at the wall, or lean against the post.
Don’t pick your nose, scratch your arm, or stoop your head.
Listen when you’re spoken to.
Never harm child or beast with evil eye (?) Don’t blush when you’re
chaffed, or you’ll be accused of mischief.
Don’t make faces.
Wash before eating.
Sit where the host tells you; avoid the highest place unless you’re
told to take it.
Of the Officers in Lords’ Courts.
Four bear rods; three wands:

1. Porter, the longest,
2. Marshal,
3. Usher, the shortest,
4. Steward, a staff, a finger thick, half a yard long.

Of the Porter.
He keeps the Gate and Stocks, takes charge of misdoers till judged,
also of clothes, and warns strangers.
He is found in meat and drink.
On his lord’s removing, he hires horses at 4d. a piece, the statute
price.
Of the Marshal of the Hall
How long Squires shall have allowances, and Fire shall burn in the
Hall.
He shall arrest rebels, when the steward is away.
Yeoman-Usher and Groom are under him.
The Groom gets fuel for the fire, and makes one in Hall for every
meal; looks after tables, trestles, forms, the cup-board, and hangings
of the Hall.
Fires last from Allsaints’ Day to Candlemas Eve, (Nov. 1 to Feb. 2.)
and thus long, Squires receive their daily candle?
The Marshal shall seat men in the Hall.
Of the Butler, Panter, and Cooks serving him.
They are the Marshal’s servants.
He shall score up all messes served, and order bread and ale for men,
but wine for gentlemen.
Each mess shall be reckoned at 6d. and be scored up to prevent the
cook’s cheating.
If bread runs short, the Marshal orders more, ‘a reward.’

Of the Butler’s duties.
He shall put a pot and loaf to each mess.
He is the panter’s mate.
The Marshal shall see to men’s lodging.
The Lord’s Chamber and Wardrobe are under the Usher of the
Chamber.
Of the Usher and Grooms of the Chamber.

1. Usher,
2. Yeoman-usher,
3. Two grooms and a Page.

The Duties of the Grooms of the Chamber.
They shall make palets of litter 9 ft. long, 7 broad, watered, twisted,
trodden, with wisps at foot and side, twisted and turned back; from the
floor-level to the waist.
For lords, 2 beds, outer and inner, hung with hangings, hooks and
eyes set on the binding; the valance hanging on a rod (?), four curtains
reaching to the ground; these he takes up with a forked rod.
The counterpane is laid at the foot, cushions on the sides, tapestry
on the floor and sides of the room.
The Groom gets fuel, and screens.
The Groom keeps the table, trestles, and forms for dinner; and water
in a heater.
He puts 3 wax-lights over the chimney, all in different syces.
The Usher of the Chamber walks about and sees that all is
served right, orders the table to be set and removed, takes charge of
the Wardrobe and Bedchamber, bids the Wardroper get all ready
before the fire, nightgown, carpet, 2 cushions, a form with a footsheet
over it; on which the lord changes his gown.
The Usher orders what’s wanted from the Buttery: a link from the
Chandler, and ale and wine.
(No meat shall be assayed except for King, Prince, Duke or
Heirs-apparent.)
From the Pantry the Usher takes fine and coarse bread, and a
wax-light that burns all night in a basin.
(The Yeoman-Usher removes the torches.)
The Usher puts lights on the Bedroom door, brings bread and wine,
(the lord washing first,) offers the drink kneeling; puts his lord to
bed, and then goes home himself.
The Yeoman-Usher sleeps at the Lord’s door.
Of the Steward.
Few are true, but many false.
He, the clerk, cook and surveyor consult over their Lord’s
dinner.
Any dainty that can be had, the Steward buys.
Before dishes are put on, the Steward enters first, then the
Server.
The Steward shall post into books all accounts written on tablets,
and add them up.
Of the Controller.
He puts down the receipt and consumption of every day.
Of the Surveyor.
He, the steward, and controller, receive nothing, but see that all
goes straight.
The Controller checks daily the Clerk of the kitchen’s account.
Of the Clerk of the Kitchen.
He shall keep account of all purchases, and payments, and wages,
shall preside at the Dresser, and keep the spices, stores, &c., and
the clothes of the officers.
Of the Chancellor.
He looks after the servants’ clothes, and horses, seals patents, and
grants of land, &c., for life, or during the lord’s pleasure.
He oversees the land too, and is a great man.
Of the Treasurer.
He takes from the Receiver what is collected from bailiff and grieve,
courts and forfeits.
He gives the Kitchen clerk money to buy provisions with, and the
clerk gives some to the baker and butler.
The Treasurer pays all wages.
He, the Receiver, Chancellor, Grieves, &c., account once a year
to the Auditor, from whom they can appeal to a Baron of the
Exchequer.
Of the Receiver of Rents.
He gives receipts, and gets a fee of 6d.
He pays fees to park-keepers, and looks after castles and
manor-houses.
Of the Avener.
He shall give the horses in the stable two armsful of hay and a peck
of oats, daily.
A Squire is Master of the Horse; under him are Avener and Farrier,
(the Farrier has a halfpenny a day for every horse he shoes,) and grooms
and pages hired at 2d. a day, or 3 halfpence, and footmen who run by
ladies’ bridles.
Of the Baker.
Out of a London bushel he shall bake 20 loaves, fine and coarse.
Of the Huntsman and his Hounds.
He gets a halfpenny a day for every hound.
The Feuterer 2 lots of bread if he has 2 leash of Greyhounds, and a
bone for each, besides perquisites of skins, &c.
Of the Ewerer or Water-bringer.
He has all the candles and cloths and gives water to every one.
Who may wash his hands, and where.
The bringer of Water shall kneel down.
The Ewerer shall cover the lord’s table with a double cloth, the
lower with the selvage to the lord’s side; the upper cloth shall be laid
double, the upper selvage turned back as if for a towel.
He shall put on cleaners for every one.
Of the Panter.
He carries 3 loaves cut square for trenchers, and the covered
Saltcellar, 2 Carving-knives, and sets the 3rd, and a spoon to his
lord.
Of the Lord’s Knives, (Bread, and Washing.)
The hafts of 2 are laid outwards, that of the 3rd inwards, and the
spoon handle by it.
More trencher loaves are set, and wine served to the Duchess.
2 Trencher-loaves, and salt, to the lord’s son; and 1 loaf and
saltcellar set at the end of the table.
Then 3 loaves of white bread are brought, and 1 coarse loaf is put in
the Alms-dish.
To assay bread, the Panter kneels, the Carver cuts him a slice, and
he eats it.
The Ewerer strains water into his basins, on the upper one of which
is a towel folded dodgily.
Then the water is assayed in a cup of white wood.
The Carver takes up the basins; a knight takes down the towel, and
wipes the cup, into which the Carver pours water; the knight hands it to
him;
he assays it, and empties the cup.
Two knights hold the towel before the lord’s sleeves, and hold the
upper basin while the Carver pours water into the lower; then he puts
the lower into the upper, and empties both, takes them to the Ewerer,
returns to the lord’s table, lays 4 trenchers for him, with 1 above.
The Carver takes 3 to cut the lord’s messes on, and has a cloth round
his neck to wipe his knives on.
Of the Almoner.
He says grace, sets down the Alms-dish, and the Carver puts the first
loaf in it.
The other loaves he pares round, cuts one in two, and gives the upper
half in halves to him.
The Almoner has a staff in his hand.
He keeps the broken food and wine left, for poor men at the gate, and
is sworn to give it all to them.
He distributes silver as he rides.
Of the Sewer (or setter-on of Dishes).
The Cook assays the meat before it’s dished.
The Sewer puts the cover on it, and the cover must never be raised
for fear of treason.
(A Dodge: If the silver dish burns you, put bits of bread under
it.)
The Sewer assays all the food: potage with a piece of bread; fish or
flesh, he eats a piece; baked meats hot, he lifts up the crust, and dips
bread in the gravy; baked meats cold, he eats a bit.
The meat-bearer stands or kneels as the Sewer does.
When bread is wanted, the Butler puts one loaf on the table, the
other on the cupboard.
The Butler assays all the wine.
What is left in the lord’s cup goes to the Alms-dish.
The Carver fills the empty cup, assays it, and gives it the lord or
puts it down.
He carves the lord’s meat, and lays it on his trencher, putting a
piece of every thing in the Alms-dish, except any favourite piece or
potage sent to a stranger.
(To say more about the Carver would require another section, so I
pass it over.)
After dinner the Sewer brings the Surnape, a broad towel and a
narrow, and slides it down.
The Usher takes one end of the broad one, the Almoner the other, and
when it is laid, he folds the narrow towel double before his lord and
lady.
After grace removes them, lays the table on the floor, and takes away
the trestles.
Of the Chandler.
He can make all kinds of candles, little and big, and mortars of
wax.
He snuffs them with short scissors.
In bed-chambers wax lights only shall be burnt; in hall, Candles of
Paris, each mess having one from Nov. 1 to Feb. 2 (see l. 393), and
squires one too.
The Butler shall give Squires their daily bread and ale all the year,
and Knights their wine.
May Christ bring us to His dwelling-place. Amen!

Bp. Grossetest’s Household Statutes.
All servants should serve truly God and their Master; doing fully all
that their Master orders, without answering.
The upper servants must be honest and diligent, and engage no
untrusty or unfit man.
iv. Dishonest, quarrelsome, and drunken servants must be turned
out.
v. All must be of one accord, vi. obedient to those above them, vii.
dress in livery, and not wear old shoes.
viii. Order your Alms to be given to the poor and sick.
ix. Make all the household dine together in the Hall.
x. Let no woman dine with you.
Let the Master show himself to all.
Don’t allow grumbling.
xi. Let your servants go to their homes.
xii. Tell your Panter and Butler to come to the table before
grace.
Tell off three yeomen to wait at table.
xiii. Tell the Steward to keep good order in the Hall, and serve
every one fairly.
xiv. Have your dish well filled that you may help others to it.
xv. Always admit your special friends, and show them you are glad to
see them.
xvi. Talk familiarly to your Bailiffs, ask how your tenants and store
do.
xvii. Allow no private meals; only those in Hall.

Stanzas and Couplets of Counsel
Never mistrust or fail your friend.
Don’t talk too much.
Spare your master’s goods as your own.
A lawless youth, a despised old age.
A Gentleman says the best he can of every one.

The schoole of Vertue
First, say this prayer: “O God! enable us to follow virtue. Defend us
this day. Let us abound with virtues, flee from vice, and go forward in
good doing to our live’s end.”
Repeat the Lord’s Prayer night and morning.
How to wash and dress yourself.
Don’t sleep too long.
Rise early; cast up your bed, and don’t let it lie.
Go down, salute your parents, wash your hands, comb your head, brush
your cap and put it on.
Tie on your shirt-collar, fasten your girdle, rub your breeches,
clean your shoes, wipe your nose on a napkin, pare your nails, clean
your ears, wash your teeth.
Have your torn clothes mended, or new ones obtained.
Get your satchell and books, and haste to School, taking too pen,
paper, and ink, which are necessary for use at school.
Then start off.
How to behave going to, and at, School.
Take off your cap to those you meet; give way to passers by.
Call your playmates on your road.
At School salute your master, and the scholars.
Go straight to your place, undo your satchell, take out your books
and learn your lesson; stick well to your books.
If you don’t work, you’ll repent it when you grow up.
Who could now speak of famous deeds of old, had not Letters preserved
them?
Work hard then, and you’ll be thought worthy to serve the state.
Men of low birth win honour by Learning, and then are doubly
happy.
When you doubt, ask to be told.
Wish well to those who warn you.
On your way home walk two and two orderly (for which men will praise
you); don’t run in heaps like a swarm of bees like boys do now.
Don’t whoop or hallow as in fox-hunting don’t chatter, or stare at
every new fangle, but walk soberly, taking your cap off to all, and
being gentle.
Do no man harm; speak fair words.
On reaching home salute your parents reverently.
How to wait at table.
Look your parents in the face, hold up your hands, and say Grace
before meate.
Grace before Meat.
Make a low curtesy; wish your parents’ food may do ’em good.
If you are big enough, bring the food to table.
Don’t fill dishes so full as to spill them on your parents’ dress, or
they’ll be angry.
Have spare trenchers ready for guests.
See there’s plenty of everything wanted.
Empty the Voiders often.
Be at hand if any one calls.
When the meat is over, clear the table:

1. cover the salt,
2. have a tray by you to carry things off on,
3. put the trenchers, &c., in one Voider,
4. sweep the crumbs into another,
5. set a clean trencher before every one,
6. put on Cheese, Fruit, Biscuits, and
7. serve Wine, Ale or Beer.

When these are finished, clear the table, and fold up the cloth.
Then spread a clean towel, bring bason and jug, and when your parents
are ready to wash, and when your parents are ready to wash, pour out the
water.
Clear the table; make a low curtsey.
How to behave at your own dinner.
Let your betters sit above you.
See others served first, then wait a while before eating.
Take salt with your knife, cut your bread, don’t fill your spoon too
full, or sup your pottage.
Have your knife sharp.
Don’t smack your lips or gnaw your bones: avoid such beastliness.
Keep your fingers clean, wipe your mouth before drinking.
Don’t jabber or stuff.
Silence hurts no one, and is fitted for a child at table.
Don’t pick your teeth, or spit too much.
Behave properly.
Don’t laugh too much.
Learn all the good manners you can.
They are better than playing the fiddle, though that’s no harm, but
necessary; yet manners are more important.
How to behave at Church.
Pray kneeling or standing.
Confess your sins to God.
He knows your disease.
Ask in faith, and what you ask you shall have; He is more merciful
than pen can tell.
Behave nicely in church, and don’t talk or chatter.
Behave reverently; the House of Prayer is not to be made a fair.
Avoid dicing and carding.
Delight in Knowledge, Virtue, and Learning.
Happy is he who cultivates Virtue.
Cursed is he who forsakes it.
Let reason rule you, and subdue your lusts.
These ills come from gambling: strife, murder, theft, cursing and
swearing.
How to behave when conversing.
Understand a question before you answer it; let a man tell all his
tale.
Then bow to him, look him in the face, and answer sensibly, not
staring about or laughing, but audibly and distinctly, your words in due
order, or you’ll straggle off, or stutter, or stammer, which is a foul
crime.
Always keep your head uncovered.
Better unfed than untaught.
How to take a Message.
Listen to it well; don’t go away not knowing it.
Then hurry away, give the message; get the answer, return home, and
tell it to your master exactly as it was told to you.
Against Anger, &c.
The slave of Anger must fall.
Anger’s deeds are strange to wise men.
A hasty man is always in trouble.
Take no revenge, but forgive.
Envy no one.
An ill body breeds debate.
The Fruits of Charity, &c.
Charity seeketh not her own, but bears patiently.
Charity seeketh not her own, but bears patiently.
Love incites to Mercy.
Patience teaches forbearance.
Pray God to give thee Charity and Patience, to lead thee to Virtue’s
School, and thence to Eternal Bliss.
Against Swearing.
Take not God’s name in vain, or He will plague thee.
Beware of His wrath, and live well in thy vocation.
What is the good of swearing?
It kindles God’s wrath against thee.
God’s law forbids swearing, and so does the counsel of
Philosophers.
Against filthy talking.
Never talk dirt.
For every word we shall give account at the Day of Doom, and be
judged according to our deeds.
Let lewd livers then fear.
Keep your tongue from vain talking.
Against Lying.
To speak the truth needs no study, therefore always practise it and
speak it.
Shame is the reward of lying.
Always speak the truth.
Who can trust a liar?
If a lie saves you once, it deceives you thrice.
A bedward Prayer.
God of mercy, take us into Thy care.
Forgive us our sins.
Deliver us from evil, and our enemy the Devil.
Assist us to conquer him and ascribe all honour to Thee.
Each one’s Duty.
The Duty of Princes, Judges, Prelates, Parents, Children, Masters,
Servants, Husbands.
The Duty of Wives, Parsons and Vicars, Men of Law, Craftsmen,
Landlords, Merchants, Subjects, Rich Men, Poor Men, Magistrates,
Officers, The Duty of all Men.
God grant us all to live and die well!

Whate-ever thow sey, avyse thee welle!
A man must mind what he says; hearts are fickle and fell.
Take care what you say. A false friend may hear it, and after a year
or two will repeat it.
Hasty speech hurts hearer and speaker. In the beginning, think on the
end.
You tell a man a secret, and he’ll betray it for a drink of wine.
Mind what you say.
Avoid backbiting and flattering; refrain from malice, and
bragging.
A venomous tongue causes sorrow. When words are said, regret is too
late.
Mind what you say.
Had men thought of this, many things done in England would never have
been begun.
To speak aright observe six things:

1. what; 2. of whom; 3. where; 4. to whom; 5. why; 6. when.
In every place mind what you say.
Almighty God, grant me grace to serve Thee!
Mary, mother, send me grace night and day!

A Dogg Lardyner, & a Sowe Gardyner
A dog in a larder, a sow in a garden, a fool with wise men, are ill
matcht.

Roger Ascham’s Advice to Lord Warwick’s Servant
Fear God, serve your lord faithfully, be courteous to your
fellows.
Despise no poor man.
Carry no tales.
Tell no lies.
Don’t play at dice or cards.
Take to your lord’s favourite sport.
Beware of idleness.
Always be at hand when you’re wanted.
Diligence will get you praise.
God be with you!

The Babees Book
My God, support me while I translate this treatise from Latin. It
shall teach those of tender age.
To know and practise virtues is the most profitable thing in the
world.
Young Babies, adorned with grace, I call on you to know this book
(for Nurture should accompany beauty), and not on aged men expert
therein.
Why add pain to hell, water to the sea, or heat to fire?
Babies, my book is for you only, and so I hope no one will find fault
with it, but only amend it.
The only reward I seek is that my book may please all and improve
you.
If you don’t know any word in it, ask till you do, and then keep hold
of it.
And do not wonder at this being in metre.
I must first describe how you Babies who dwell in households should
behave at meals, and be ready with lovely and benign words when you are
spoken to.
Lady Facetia, help me! Thou art the Mother of all Virtue.
Help the ignorance of me untaught!
Fair Babies, when you enter your lord’s place, say “God speed,” and
salute all there.
Kneel on one knee to your lord.
If any speak to you, look straight at them, and listen well till they
have finished; do not chatter or let your eyes wander about the
house.
Answer sensibly, shortly, and easily.
Many words are a bore to a wise man.
Stand till you are told to sit: keep your head, hands, and feet
quiet:
don’t scratch yourself, or lean against a post, or handle anything
near.
Bow to your lord when you answer.
If any one better than yourself comes in, retire and give place to
him.
Turn your back on no man.
Be silent while your lord drinks, not laughing, whispering, or
joking.
If he tells you to sit down, do so at once.
Then don’t talk dirt, or scorn any one, but be meek and cheerful.
If your better praises you, rise up and thank him heartily.
When your lord or lady is speaking about the household, don’t you
interfere, but be always ready to serve at the proper time, to bring
drink, hold lights, or anything else, and so get a good name.
The best prayer you can make to God is to be well mannered.
If your lord offers you his cup, rise up, take it with both hands,
offer it to no one else, but give it back to him that brought it.
At Noon, when your lord is ready for dinner, some pour water on him,
some hold the towel for him till he has finished, and don’t leave till
grace is said.
Stand by your lord till he tells you to sit, then keep your knife
clean and sharp to cut your food.
Be silent, and tell no nasty stories.
Cut your bread, don’t break it.
Lay a clean trencher before you, and eat your broth with a spoon,
don’t sup it up.
Don’t leave your spoon in your dish.
Don’t lean on the table, or dirty the cloth.
Don’t hang your head over your dish, or eat with a full mouth, or
pick your nose, teeth, and nails, or stuff your mouth so that you can’t
speak.
Wipe your mouth when you drink, and don’t dirty the cup with your
hands.
Don’t dip your meat in the salt-cellar, or put your knife in your
mouth.
Taste every dish that’s brought to you, and when once your plate is
taken away, don’t ask for it again.
If strangers dine with you, share all good food sent to you with
them.
It’s not polite to keep it all to yourself.
Don’t cut your meat like field labourers, who have such an appetite
they don’t care how they hack their food.
Sweet children, let your delight be courtesy, and eschew
rudeness.
Have a clean trencher and knife for your cheese, and eat
properly.
Don’t chatter either, and you shall get a good repute for
gentleness.
When the meal is over, clean your knives, and put them in their
places; keep your seats till you’ve washed; then rise up without
laughing or joking, and go to your lord’s table.
Stand there till grace is said.
Then some of you go for water, some hold the towel, some pour water
over his hands.
Other things I shall not put in this little Report, but skip over,
praying that no one will abuse me for this work.
Let readers add or take away: I address it to every one who likes to
correct it.
Sweet children, I beseech you know this book, and may God make you so
expert therein that you may attain endless bliss.

Lerne or be Lewde
Don’t be too loving or angry, bold or busy, courteous or cruel or
cowardly, and don’t drink too often, or be too lofty or anxious, but
friendly of cheer.
Hate jealousy, be not too hasty or daring; joke not too oft; ware
knaves’ tricks.
Don’t be too grudging or too liberal, too meddling, too particular,
new-fangled, or too daring.
Hate oaths and flattery.
Please well thy master.
Don’t be too rackety, or go out too much.
Don’t be too revengeful or wrathful, and wade not too deep.
The middle path is the best for us all.

Urbanitatis
When you come before a lord take off your cap or hood, and fall on
your right knee twice or thrice.
Keep your cap off till you’re told to put it on; hold up your chin;
look in the lord’s face; keep hand and foot still; don’t spit or snot;
get rid of it quietly; behave well.
When you go into the hall, don’t press up too high.
Don’t be shamefaced.
Wherever you go, good manners make the man.
Reverence your betters, but treat all equally whom you don’t
know.
See that your hands are clean, and your knife sharp.
Let worthier men help themselves before you eat.
Don’t clutch at the best bit.
Keep your hands from dirtying the cloth, and don’t wipe your nose on
it, or dip too deep in your cup.
Have no meat in your mouth when you drink or speak; and stop talking
when your neighbour is drinking.
Scorn and reprove no man.
Keep your fingers from what would bring you to grief.
Among ladies, look, don’t talk.
Don’t laugh loud, or riot with ribalds.
Don’t repeat what you hear.
Words make or mar you.
If you follow a worthier man, let your right shoulder follow his
back, and don’t speak till he has done.
Be austere (?) in speech; don’t stop any man’s tale.
Christ gives us all wit to know this, and heaven as our reward.
Amen!

The Lytylle Childrenes Lytil Boke or Edyllys be
Clerks say that courtesy came from heaven when Gabriel greeted our
Lady.
All virtues are included in it.
See that your hands and nails are clean.
Don’t eat till grace is said, or sit down till you’re told.
First, think on the poor; the full belly wots not what the hungry
feels.
Don’t eat too quickly.
Touch nothing till you are fully helped.
Don’t break your bread in two, or put your pieces in your pocket,
your fingers in the dish, or your meat in the salt-cellar.
Don’t pick your ears or nose, or drink with your mouth full, or cram
it full.
Don’t pick your teeth with your knife.
Take your spoon out when you’ve finished soup.
Don’t spit over or on the table, that’s not proper.
Don’t put your elbows on the table, or belch as if you had a bean in
your throat.
Be careful of good food; and be courteous and cheerful.
Don’t whisper in any man’s ear.
Take your food with your fingers, and don’t waste it.
Don’t grin, or talk too much, or spill your food.
Keep your cloth before you.
Cut your meat, don’t bite it.
Don’t open your mouth too wide when you eat, or blow in your
food.
If your lord drinks, always wait till he has done.
Keep your trencher clean.
Drink behind no man’s back.
Don’t rush at the cheese, or throw your bones on the floor.
Sit still till grace is said and you’ve washed your hands, and don’t
spit in the basin.
Rise quietly, don’t jabber, but thank your host and all the company,
and then men will say, ‘A gentleman was here!’
He who despises this teaching isn’t fit to sit at a good man’s
table.
Children, love this little book, and pray that Jesus may help its
author to die among his friends, and not be troubled with devils, but be
in joy for ever.
Amen!

The Young Children’s Book
Whoever will thrive, must be courteous, and begin in his youth.
Courtesy came from heaven, and contains all virtues, as rudeness does
all vices.
Get up betimes; cross yourself; wash your hands and face; comb your
hair; say your prayers; go to church and hear Mass.
Say ‘Good Morning’ to every one you meet.
Then have breakfast, first crossing your mouth.
Say grace, thank Jesus for your food, and say an Ave for the souls in
pain.
Then set to work, and don’t be idle.
Scripture tells you, if you work, you must eat what you get with your
hands.
Be true in word and deed; truth keeps a man from blame.
Mercy and Truth are the two ways to heaven, fail not to go by
them.
Make only proper promises, and keep them without falsehood.
Love God and your neighbours, and so fulfil all the Law.
Meddle only with what belongs to you.
Scorn not the poor; flatter no one; oppress (?) not servants.
Be meek, and wait till your better has spoken.
When you speak to a man, keep still, and look him in the face.
Don’t be a tale-bearer.
Thank all who speak well of you.
Use few words; don’t swear or lie in your dealings.
Earn money honestly, and keep out of debt.
Try to please; seek peace; mind whom you speak to and what you
say.
Wherever you enter, say “God be here;” and speak courteously to
master and man.
Stand till you are told to sit at meat, and don’t leave your seat
before others.
Sit upright; be sociable, and share with your neighbours.
Take salt with a clean knife; talk no scandal, but speak well of
all.
Hear and see; don’t talk.
Be satisfied with what’s set before you.
Wipe your mouth before you drink; keep your fingers and lips
clean.
Don’t speak with your mouth full.
Praise your food for whether it’s good or bad, it must be taken in
good part.
Mind where you spit, and put your hand before your mouth.
Keep your knife clean, and don’t wipe it on the cloth.
Don’t put your spoon in the dish, or make a noise, like boys, when
you sup.
Don’t put meat off your plate into the dish, but into a voider.
If your superior hands you a cup, drink, but take the cup with two
hands.
When he speaks to you, doff your cap and bend your knee.
Don’t scratch yourself at table, wipe your nose, or play with your
spoon, &c.
This book is for young children who don’t stay long at school.
God grant them grace to be virtuous!

Stans Puer ad Mensam (both versions).
When you stand before your sovereign, speak not recklessly, and keep
your hands still.
Don’t stare about, lean against a post, look at the wall, pick your
nose, or scratch yourself.
When spoken to, don’t lumpishly look at the ground.
Walk demurely in the streets, and don’t laugh before your lord.
Clean your nails and wash your hands.
Sit where you’re told to, and don’t be too hasty to begin eating.
Don’t grin, shout, or stuff your jaws with food, or drink too
quickly.
Keep your lips clean, and wipe your spoon.
Don’t make sops of bread, or drink with a dirty mouth.
Don’t dirty the table linen, or pick your teeth with your knife.
Don’t swear or talk ribaldry, or take the best bits; share with your
fellows.
Eat up your pieces, and keep your nails clean.
It’s bad manners to bring up old complaints.
Don’t play with your knife, or shuffle your feet about.
Don’t spill your broth on your chest, or use dirty knives, or fill
your spoon too full. Be quick to do whatever your lord orders.
Take salt with your knife; don’t blow in your cup, or begin
quarrels.
Interrupt no man in his story.
Drink wine and ale in moderation.
Don’t talk too much, but keep a middle course.
Be gentle and tractable, but not too soft.
Children must not be revengeful; their anger is appeased with a bit
of apple.
Children’s quarrels are first play, then crying; don’t believe their
complaints; give ’em the rod.
Spare that, and you’ll spoil all.
Young children, pray take heed to my little ballad, which shall lead
you into all virtues.
My mistakes I submit to correction.

Ffor to serve a lord.
1. Have your table-cloths and napkins ready, also trenchers, salts,
&c.
2. Bring your cloths folded, lay them on the table, then cover the
cupboard, the side-table, and the chief table.
3. Bring out the chief salt-cellar, and pared loaves, and hold the
carving-knives in your right hand.
4. Put your chief salt-cellar before the chief person’s seat, his
bread by it, and his trenchers before it.
5. Put the second salt-cellar at the lower end. If wooden trenchers
are used, bring them on.
6. Put salt-cellars on the side-tables.
7. Bring out your basins, &c., and set all your plate on the
cupboard.
8. Let the chief servants have basins, &c., ready, and after
Grace, hold the best basin to the chief lord, with the towel under; and
then let his messmates wash.
9. The chief lord takes his seat, then his messmates theirs; then the
lower-mess people theirs. (When Grace begins, the bread cover is to be
taken away.)
10. The Carver takes 4 trenchers on his knife-point, and lays them
before the chief lord, (one to put his salt on,) and 3 or 2 before the
less people.
11. The Butler gives each man a spoon and a napkin.
12. The Carver pares 2 loaves, lays 2 before his lord, and 2 or 1 to
the rest.
13. Serve brawn, beef, swan, pheasant, fritters. As a change for
beef, have legs or chines of pork, or tongue of ox or hart.
14. Clear away the 1st course, crumbs, bones, and used trenchers.
15. Serve the Second Course: Small birds, lamb, kid, venison,
rabbits, meat pie, teal, woodcock. Great birds.
16. Fill men’s cups and remove their trenchers.
17. Collect the spoons.
18. Take up the lowest dishes at the side-tables, and then clear the
high table.
19. Sweep all the bits of bread, trenchers, &c., into a
voyder.
20. Take away the cups, &c., from all the messes, putting the
trenchers,
&c., in a voyder, and scraping the crumbs off with a carving-knife.
21. Serve wafers in towels laid on the table, and sweet wine. In
holiday time serve cheese, or fruit; in winter, roast apples.
22. Clear away all except the chief salt-cellar, whole bread, and
carving-knives; take these to the pantry.
23. Lay a fresh cloth all along the chief table.
24. Have ready basons and jugs with hot or cold water; and after
Grace, hand basins and water to the first mess, then the second.
25. Take off and fold up the towels and cloth, and give ’em to
the
Panter.
26. Clear away tables, trestles, forms; and put cushions on other
seats.
27. Butler, put the cups, &c., back into your office.
28. Serve knights and ladies with bread and wine, kneeling.
29. Conduct strangers to the Chamber.
30. Serve them with dainties: junket, pippins, or green ginger; and
sweet wines. How to carve a Swan, Goose, Wild-fowl, Crane, Heronsew,
Bittern, Egret, Partridge, Quail, Pheasant.

A Bridal Feast.
First Course.
Boar’s head, and a Device of Welcome. Venison and Custard, with a Device
of Meekness.
Second Course.
Venison, Crane, &c., and a Device of Gladness and Loyalty.
Third Course.
Sweets, &c., Game, with a Device of Thankfulness.
Fourth Course.
Cheese and a cake with a Device of Child-bearing and a promise of
babies.

Latin Graces.
A general Grace.
The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord. Glory be to the Father,
&c. Lord, have mercy upon us. Lord, bless us. Make us partakers of
the heavenly table.
Grace after Dinner.
May the God of peace be with us! We thank thee, O Lord, for thy
benefits. Lord, have mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us! I will
bless the Lord alway. May the name of the Lord be blessed for ever!
Hail, Queen of Heaven, flower of virgins! pray thy Son to save the
faithful!
Grace on Fish-Days.
The poor shall eat and be satisfied. Glory be to the Father, &c.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all.
In Lent.
Break thy bread to the hungry, and take the wanderer to thy home.
Grace after Dinner.
Four Short Graces.

1. Before Dinner.
2. After Meals.
Bless the Lord for this meal. Mary, pray for us!
3. Before Supper.
Giver of all, sanctify this supper.
4. After Supper.
The Lord is holy in all his works. Blessed be the name of the
Lord.

On Easter-Eve.
Christ, have mercy upon us! Seek those things that are above.
Grace after Dinner.
God of Peace, We give thee thanks, O Lord. Pour into us thy Spirit,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.
On Easter-Day.
This is the day which the Lord hath made: Let us rejoice and be glad
in it. Bless us, O Lord! Our passover is slain, even Christ.
After Dinner.
Of thy resurrection, Christ, the heavens and the earth are glad.
Thanks be to God!
Before Supper.
After Supper.
This is the day, &c. Hallelujah. Let us bless the Lord!

Symon’s Lesson of Wysedome for all Maner Chyldryn.
Children, attend.
You’d be better unborn than untaught.
You mustn’t have your own way always.
Tell the truth, don’t be froward, hold up your head, take off your
hood when you’re spoken to.
Wash your hands and face.
Be courteous.
Don’t throw stones at dogs and hogs.
Mock at no one.
Don’t swear.
Eat what’s given you, and don’t ask for this and that.
Honour your father and mother: kneel and ask their blessing.
Keep your clothes clean.
Don’t go bird’s-nesting, or steal fruit, or throw stones at men’s
windows, or play in church.
Don’t chatter.
Get home by daylight.
Keep clear of fire and water, and the edges of wells and brooks.
Take care of your book, cap, and gloves, or you’ll be birched on your
bare bottom.
Don’t be a liar or thief, or make faces at any man.
When you meet any one, lower your hood and wish ’em “god speed.” Be
meek to clerks.
Rise early, go to school, and learn fast if you want to be our
bishop.
Attend to all these things, for a good child needs learning, and he
who hates the child spares the rod.
As a spur makes a horse go, so a rod makes a child learn and be
mild.
So, children, do well, and you’ll not get a sound beating.
May God keep you good!

The Birched School-Boy
Learning is strange work; the birch twigs are so sharp.
I’d sooner go 20 miles than go to school on Mondays.
My master asks where I’ve been.
‘Milking ducks,’ I tell him, and he gives me pepper for it.
I only wish he was a hare, and my book a wild cat, and all his books
dogs.
Wouldn’t I blow my horn!
Don’t I wish he was dead!
 
 





End of Project Gutenberg's Early English Meals and Manners, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY ENGLISH MEALS AND MANNERS ***

***** This file should be named 24790-h.htm or 24790-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/7/9/24790/

Produced by Louise Hope, Kathryn Lybarger and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.