Sir Gawayne and The Green Knight
    

  body                 {margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%; }
  p                    {text-align: justify;}
  blockquote           {text-align: justify;}
  h1,h2,h3,h4,h5,h6    {text-align: center;}
  pre                  {font-size: 0.7em;}

  table                {padding: 1em; }
  td                   {vertical-align: top; }
  hr                   {text-align: center; width: 50%;}
  html>body hr         {margin-right: 25%; margin-left: 25%; width: 50%;}
  hr.full              {width: 100%;}
  html>body hr.full    {margin-right: 0%; margin-left: 0%; width: 100%;}
  hr.short             {text-align: center; width: 20%;}
  html>body hr.short   {margin-right: 40%; margin-left: 40%; width: 20%;}

  .note
  {margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%; font-size: 0.9em;}

  span.pagenum
  {position: absolute; left: 1%; right: 91%; font-size: 8pt;}

  span.linenum
  {position: absolute; left: 5%; right: 91%; }

  span.sidenote
  {position: absolute; left: 65%; font-size: 8pt; }

  .poem
  {margin-left:5%; margin-right:10%; margin-bottom: 1em; text-align: left;}
  .poem .stanza        {margin: 1em 0em 1em 0em;}
  .poem p              {margin: 0; padding-left: 3em; text-indent: -3em;}
  .poem p.i2           {margin-left: 1em;}
  .poem p.i4           {margin-left: 2em;}
  .poem p.i6           {margin-left: 3em;}
  .poem p.i8           {margin-left: 4em;}
  



The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight
       An Alliterative Romance-Poem (c. 1360 A.D.)

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: January 3, 2005 [EBook #14568]
Last Updated: May 2, 2018

Language: English, Middle (1100-1500)

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR GAWAYNE AND THE GREEN KNIGHT ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Keith Edkins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team

HTML file revised by David Widger






      Sir Gawayne
    

      and
    

      The Green Knight:
    

      AN ALLITERATIVE ROMANCE-POEM,
    

      (AB. 1360 A.D.)
    

      BY THE AUTHOR OF
    

      "EARLY ENGLISH ALLITERATIVE POEMS."
    

      RE-EDITED FROM COTTON. MS. NERO, A.x., IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
    

      BY
    

      RICHARD MORRIS,
    

      EDITOR OF HAMPOLE'S "PRICKE OF CONSCIENCE," "EARLY ENGLISH ALLITERATIVE
      POEMS," ETC.;
    

      MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF THE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY.
    

      SECOND EDITION, REVISED, 1869.
    

      LONDON
    

      PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY
    

      BY N. TRÜBNER & CO., 60, PATERNOSTER ROW,
    

      MDCCCLXIV.
    


      JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.
    




          NOTE: The Old English "yogh" characters have been translated both
          upper and lower-case yoghs to digit 3's. There are Unicode allocations
          for these (in HTML &#540; and &#541;) but at present no font
          which implements these. Substiting the digit 3 seemed a workable
          compromise which anybody can read. The linked html "Old
          English 'yogh' file" uses &#540; and &#541;
          representations, and is included for users with specialist fonts.
        




      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
    

      In re-editing the present romance-poem I have been saved all labour of
      transcription by using the very accurate text contained in Sir F. Madden's
      "Syr Gawayne."
    

      I have not only read his copy with the manuscript, but also the
      proof-sheets as they came to hand, hoping by this means to give the reader
      a text free from any errors of transcription.
    

      The present edition differs from that of the earlier one in having the
      contractions of the manuscript expanded and side-notes added to the text
      to enable the reader to follow with some degree of ease the author's
      pleasant narrative of Sir Gawayne's adventures.
    

      The Glossary is taken from Sir F. Madden's "Syr Gawayne,"1 to
      which, for the better interpretation of the text, I have made several
      additions, and have, moreover, glossed nearly all the words previously
      left unexplained.
    

      For a description of the Manuscript, and particulars relating to the
      authorship and dialect of the present work, the reader is referred to the
      preface to Early English Alliterative Poems.
    

      R.M.
    



          LONDON,
        

December 22, 1864.
        



      [1 Sir F. Madden has most generously placed at the disposal of
      the Early English Text Society any of his works which it may determine to
      re-edit.]
    


      INTRODUCTION.
    

      No Knight of the Round Table has been so highly honoured by the old
      Romance-writers as Sir Gawayne, the son of Loth, and nephew to the
      renowned Arthur. They delighted to describe him as Gawayne the good, a man
      matchless on mould, the most gracious that under God lived, the hardiest
      of hand, the most fortunate in arms, and the most polite in hall, whose
      knowledge, knighthood, kindly works, doings, doughtiness, and deeds of
      arms were known in all lands.
    

      When Arthur beheld the dead body of his kinsman lying on the ground bathed
      in blood, he is said to have exclaimed, "O righteous God, this blood were
      worthy to be preserved and enshrined in gold!" Our author, too, loves to
      speak of his hero in similar terms of praise, calling him the knight
      faultless in his five wits, void of every offence, and adorned with every
      earthly virtue. He represents him as one whose trust was in the five
      wounds, and in whom the five virtues which distinguished the true knight
      were more firmly established than in any other on earth.
    

      The author of the present story, who, as we know from his religious poems,
      had an utter horror of moral impurity, could have chosen no better subject
      for a romance in which amusement and moral instruction were to be
      combined. In the following tale he shows how the true knight, though
      tempted sorely not once alone, but twice, nay thrice, breaks not his vow
      of chastity, but turns aside the tempter's shafts with the shield of
      purity and arm of faith, and so passes scatheless through the perilous
      defile of trial and opportunity seeming safe.
    

      But while our author has borrowed many of the details of his story from
      the "Roman de Perceval" by Chrestien de Troyes, he has made the narrative
      more attractive by the introduction of several original and highly
      interesting passages which throw light on the manners and amusements of
      our ancestors.
    

      The following elaborate descriptions are well deserving of especial
      notice:—
    


        I. The mode of completely arming a knight (ll. 568-589).
      



        II. The hunting and breaking the deer (ll. 1126-1359).
      



        III. The hunting and unlacing the wild boar (ll. 1412-1614).
      



        IV. A fox hunt (ll. 1675-1921).
      


      The following is an outline of the story of Gawayne's adventures, more or
      less in the words of the writer himself:—
    


        Arthur, the greatest of Britain's kings, holds the Christmas festival at
        Camelot, surrounded by the celebrated knights of the Round Table, noble
        lords, the most renowned under heaven, and ladies the loveliest that
        ever had life (ll. 37-57). This noble company celebrate the New Year by
        a religious service, by the bestowal of gifts, and the most joyous
        mirth. Lords and ladies take their seats at the table—Queen
        Guenever, the grey-eyed, gaily dressed, sits at the daïs, the high
        table, or table of state, where too sat Gawayne and Ywain together with
        other worthies of the Round Table (ll. 58-84, 107-115). Arthur, in mood
        as joyful as a child, his blood young and his brain wild, declares that
        he will not eat nor sit long at the table until some adventurous thing,
        some uncouth tale, some great marvel, or some encounter of arms has
        occurred to mark the return of the New Year (ll. 85-106).
      



        The first course was announced with cracking of trumpets, with the noise
        of nakers and noble pipes.
      




          "Each two had dishes twelve,
        

          Good beer and bright wine both."
        




        Scarcely was the first course served when another noise than that of
        music was heard. There rushes in at the hall-door a knight of gigantic
        stature—the greatest on earth—in measure high. He was
        clothed entirely in green, and rode upon a green foal (ll. 116-178).
        Fair wavy hair fell about the shoulders of the Green Knight, and a great
        beard like a bush hung upon his breast (ll. 179-202).
      



        The knight carried no helmet, shield, or spear, but in one hand a holly
        bough, and in the other an axe "huge and unmeet," the edge of which was
        as keen as a sharp razor (ll. 203-220). Thus arrayed, the Green Knight
        enters the hall without saluting any one. The first word that he uttered
        was, "Where is the govenour of this gang? gladly would I see him and
        with himself speak reason." To the knights he cast his eye, looking for
        the most renowned. Much did the noble assembly marvel to see a man and a
        horse of such a hue, green as the grass. Even greener they seemed than
        green enamel on bright gold. Many marvels had they seen, but none such
        as this. They were afraid to answer, but sat stone-still in a dead
        silence, as if overpowered by sleep;
      




          "Not all from fear, but some for courtesy" (ll. 221-249).
        




        Then Arthur before the high daïs salutes the Green Knight, bids him
        welcome, and entreats him to stay awhile at his Court. The knight says
        that his errand is not to abide in any dwelling, but to seek the most
        valiant of the heroes of the Round Table that he may put his courage to
        the proof, and thus satisfy himself as to the fame of Arthur's court. "I
        come," he says, "in peace, as ye may see by this branch that I bear
        here. Had I come with hostile intentions, I should not have left my
        hauberk, helmet, shield, sharp spear, and other weapons behind me. But
        because I desire no war, 'my weeds are softer.' If thou be so bold as
        all men say, thou wilt grant me the request I am about to make." "Sir
        courteous knight," replies Arthur, "if thou cravest battle only, here
        failest thou not to fight." "Nay," says the Green Knight, "I seek no
        fighting. Here about on this bench are only beardless children. Were I
        arrayed in arms on a high steed no man here would be a match for me (ll.
        250-282). But it is now Christmas time, and this is the New Year, and I
        see around me many brave ones;—if any be so bold in his blood that
        dare strike a stroke for another, I shall give him this rich axe to do
        with it whatever he pleases. I shall abide the first blow just as I sit,
        and will stand him a stroke, stiff on this floor, provided that I deal
        him another in return.
      




          And yet give I him respite,
        

          A twelvemonth and a day;
        

          Now haste and let see tite (soon)
        

          Dare any here-in ought say.'"
        




        If he astounded them at first, much more so did he after this speech,
        and fear held them all silent. The knight, righting himself in his
        saddle, rolls fiercely his red eyes about, bends his bristly green
        brows, and strokes his beard awaiting a reply. But finding none that
        would carp with him, he exclaims, "What! is this Arthur's house, the
        fame of which has spread through so many realms? Forsooth, the renown of
        the Round Table is overturned by the word of one man's speech, for all
        tremble for dread without a blow being struck!" (ll. 283-313). With this
        he laughed so loud that Arthur blushed for very shame, and waxed as
        wroth as the wind. "I know no man," he says, "that is aghast at thy
        great words. Give me now thy axe and I will grant thee thy request!"
        Arthur seizes the axe, grasps the handle, and sternly brandishes it
        about, while the Green Knight, with a stern cheer and a dry countenance,
        stroking his beard and drawing down his coat, awaits the blow (ll.
        314-335). Sir Gawayne, the nephew of the king, beseeches his uncle to
        let him undertake the encounter; and, at the earnest entreaty of his
        nobles, Arthur consents "to give Gawayne the game" (ll. 336-365).
      



        Sir Gawayne then takes possession of the axe, but, before the blow is
        dealt, the Green Knight asks the name of his opponent. "In good faith,"
        answers the good knight, "Gawayne I am called, that bids thee to this
        buffet, whatever may befall after, and at this time twelvemonth will
        take from thee another, with whatever weapon thou wilt, and with no
        wight else alive." "By Gog," quoth the Green Knight, "it pleases me well
        that I shall receive at thy fist that which I have sought here—moreover
        thou hast truly rehearsed the terms of the covenant,—but thou
        shalt first pledge me thy word that thou wilt seek me thyself,
        wheresoever on earth thou believest I may be found, and fetch thee such
        wages as thou dealest me to-day before this company of doughty ones."
        "Where should I seek thee?" replies Gawayne, "where is thy place? I know
        not thee, thy court, or thy name. I wot not where thou dwellest, but
        teach me thereto, tell me how thou art called, and I shall endeavour to
        find thee,—and that I swear thee for truth and by my sure troth."
        "That is enough in New Year," says the groom in green, "if I tell thee
        when I have received the tap. When thou hast smitten me, then smartly I
        will teach thee of my house, my home, and my own name, so that thou
        mayest follow my track and fulfil the covenant between us. If I spend no
        speech, then speedest thou the better, for then mayest thou remain in
        thy own land and seek no further; but cease thy talking1 (ll.
        366-412). Take now thy grim tool to thee and let us see how thou
        knockest." "Gladly, sir, for sooth," quoth Gawayne, and his axe he
        brandishes.
      



        [1 This, I think, is the true explanation of slokes.]
      



        The Green Knight adjusts himself on the ground, bends slightly his head,
        lays his long lovely locks over his crown, and lays bare his neck for
        the blow. Gawayne then gripped the axe, and, raising it on high, let it
        fall quickly upon the knight's neck and severed the head from the body.
        The fair head fell from the neck to the earth, and many turned it aside
        with their feet as it rolled forth. The blood burst from the body, yet
        the knight never faltered nor fell; but boldly he started forth on stiff
        shanks and fiercely rushed forward, seized his head, and lifted it up
        quickly. Then he runs to his horse, the bridle he catches, steps into
        his stirrups and strides aloft. His head by the hair he holds in his
        hands, and sits as firmly in his saddle as if no mishap had ailed him,
        though headless he was (ll. 413-439). He turned his ugly trunk about—that
        ugly body that bled,—and holding the head in his hand, he directed
        the face toward the "dearest on the dais." The head lifted up its
        eyelids and looked abroad, and thus much spoke with its mouth as ye may
        now hear:
      



        "Loke, Gawayne, thou be prompt to go as thou hast promised, and seek
        till thou find me according to thy promise made in the hearing of these
        knights. Get thee to the Green Chapel, I charge thee, to fetch such a
        dint as thou hast dealt, to be returned on New Year's morn. As the
        Knight of the Green Chapel I am known to many, wherefore if thou seekest
        thou canst not fail to find me. Therefore come, or recreant be called."
        With a fierce start the reins he turns, rushes out of the hall-door, his
        head in his hand, so that the fire of the flint flew from the hoofs of
        his foal. To what kingdom he belonged knew none there, nor knew they
        from whence he had come. What then?
      




          "The king and Gawayne there
        

          At that green (one) they laugh and grin."
        




        Though Arthur wondered much at the marvel, he let no one see that he was
        at all troubled about it, but full loudly thus spake to his comely queen
        with courteous speech:
      



        "Dear dame, to-day be never dismayed, well happens such craft at
        Christmas time. I may now proceed to meat, for I cannot deny that I have
        witnessed a wondrous adventure this day" (ll. 440-475).
      



        He looked upon Sir Gawayne and said, "Now, sir, hang up thine axe, for
        enough has it hewn." So the weapon was hung up on high that all might
        look upon it, and "by true title thereof tell the wonder." Then all the
        knights hastened to their seats at the table, so did the king and our
        good knight, and they were there served with all dainties, "with all
        manner of meat and minstrelsy."
      



        Though words were wanting when they first to seat went, now are their
        hands full of stern work, and the marvel affords them good subject for
        conversation. But a year passes full quickly and never returns,—the
        beginning is seldom like the end; wherefore this Christmas passed away
        and the year after, and each season in turn followed after another (ll.
        476-520). Thus winter winds round again, and then Gawayne thinks of his
        wearisome journey (ll. 521-535). On All-hallows day Arthur entertains
        right nobly the lords and ladies of his court in honour of his nephew,
        for whom all courteous knights and lovely ladies were in great grief.
        Nevertheless they spoke only of mirth, and, though joyless themselves,
        made many a joke to cheer the good Sir Gawayne (ll. 536-565). Early on
        the morrow Sir Gawayne, with great ceremony, is arrayed in his armour
        (ll. 566-589), and thus completely equipped for his adventure he first
        hears mass, and afterwards takes leave of Arthur, the knights of the
        Round Table, and the lords and ladies of the court, who kiss him and
        commend him to Christ. He bids them all good day, as he thought, for
        evermore (ll. 590-669);
      




          "Very much was the warm water that poured from eyes that day."
        




        Now rides our knight through the realms of England with no companion but
        his foal, and no one to hold converse with save God alone. From Camelot,
        in Somersetshire, he proceeds through Gloucestershire and the adjoining
        counties into Montgomeryshire, and thence through North Wales to
        Holyhead, adjoining the Isle of Anglesea (ll. 670-700), from which he
        passes into the very narrow peninsula of Wirral, in Cheshire, where
        dwelt but few that loved God or man. Gawayne enquires after the Green
        Knight of the Green Chapel, but all the inhabitants declare that they
        have never seen "any man of such hues of green."
      



        The knight thence pursues his journey by strange paths, over hill and
        moor, encountering on his way not only serpents, wolves, bulls, bears,
        and boars, but wood satyrs and giants. But worse than all those,
        however, was the sharp winter, "when the cold clear water shed from the
        clouds, and froze ere it might fall to the earth. Nearly slain with the
        sleet he slept in his armour, more nights than enough, in naked rocks"
        (ll. 701-729).
      



        Thus in peril and plight the knight travels on until Christmas-eve, and
        to Mary he makes his moan that she may direct him to some abode. On the
        morn he arrives at an immense forest, wondrously wild, surrounded by
        high hills on every side, where he found hoary oaks full huge, a hundred
        together. The hazel and the hawthorn intermingled were all overgrown
        with moss, and upon their boughs sat many sad birds that piteously piped
        for pain of the cold. Gawayne besought the Lord and Mary to guide him to
        some habitation where he might hear mass (ll. 730-762). Scarcely had he
        crossed himself thrice, when he perceived a dwelling in the wood set
        upon a hill. It was the loveliest castle he had ever beheld. It was
        pitched on a prairie, with a park all about it, enclosing many a tree
        for more than two miles. It shone as the sun through the bright oaks
        (ll. 763-772).
      



        Gawayne urges on his steed Gringolet, and finds himself at the "chief
        gate." He called aloud, and soon there appeared a "porter" on the wall,
        who demanded his errand.
      



        "Good sir," quoth Gawayne, "wouldst thou go to the high lord of this
        house, and crave a lodging for me?"
      



        "Yea, by Peter!" replied the porter, "well I know that thou art welcome
        to dwell here as long as thou likest."
      



        The drawbridge is soon let down, and the gates opened wide to receive
        the knight. Many noble ones hasten to bid him welcome (ll. 773-825).
        They take away his helmet, sword, and shield, and many a proud one
        presses forward to do him honour. They bring him into the hall, where a
        fire was brightly burning upon the hearth. Then the lord of the land1
        comes from his chamber and welcomes Sir Gawayne, telling him that he is
        to consider the place as his own. Our knight is next conducted to a
        bright bower, where was noble bedding—curtains of pure silk, with
        golden hems, and Tarsic tapestries upon the walls and the floors (ll.
        826-859). Here the knight doffed his armour and put on rich robes, which
        so well became him, that all declared that a more comely knight Christ
        had never made (ll. 860-883).
      



        [1 Gawayne is now in the castle of the Green Knight, who,
        divested of his elvish or supernatural character, appears to our knight
        merely as a bold one with a beaver-hued beard.]
      



        A table is soon raised, and Gawayne, having washed, proceeds to meat.
        Many dishes are set before him—"sews" of various kinds, fish of
        all kinds, some baked in bread, others broiled on the embers, some
        boiled, and others seasoned with spices. The knight expresses himself
        well pleased, and calls it a most noble and princely feast.
      



        After dinner, in reply to numerous questions, he tells his host that he
        is Gawayne, one of the Knights of the Round Table. When this was made
        known great was the joy in the hall. Each one said softly to his
        companion, "Now we shall see courteous behaviour and learn the terms of
        noble discourse, since we have amongst us 'that fine father of nurture.'
        Truly God has highly favoured us in sending us such a noble guest as Sir
        Gawayne" (ll. 884-927). At the end of the Christmas festival Gawayne
        desires to take his departure from the castle, but his host persuades
        him to stay, promising to direct him to the Green Chapel (about two
        miles from the castle), that he may be there by the appointed time (ll.
        1029-1082).
      



        A covenant is made between them, the terms of which were that the lord
        of the castle should go out early to the chase, that Gawayne meanwhile
        should lie in his loft at his ease, then rise at his usual hour, and
        afterwards sit at table with his hostess, and that at the end of the day
        they should make an exchange of whatever they might obtain in the
        interim. "Whatever I win in the wood," says the lord, "shall be yours,
        and what thou gettest shall be mine" (ll. 1083-1125).
      



        Full early before daybreak the folk uprise, saddle their horses, and
        truss their mails. The noble lord of the land, arrayed for riding, eats
        hastily a sop, and having heard mass, proceeds with a hundred hunters to
        hunt the wild deer (ll. 1126-1177).
      



        All this time Gawayne lies in his gay bed. His nap is disturbed by a
        little noise at the door, which is softly opened. He heaves up his head
        out of the clothes, and, peeping through the curtains, beholds a most
        lovely lady (the wife of his host). She came towards the bed, and the
        knight laid himself down quickly, pretending to be asleep. The lady
        stole to the bed, cast up the curtains, crept within, sat her softly on
        the bed-side, and waited some time till the knight should awake. After
        lurking awhile under the clothes considering what it all meant, Gawayne
        unlocked his eyelids, and put on a look of surprise, at the same time
        making the sign of the cross, as if afraid of some hidden danger (ll.
        1178-1207). "Good morrow, sir," said that fair lady, "ye are a careless
        sleeper to let one enter thus. I shall bind you in your bed, of that be
        ye sure." "Good morrow," quoth Gawayne, "I shall act according to your
        will with great pleasure, but permit me to rise that I may the more
        comfortably converse with you." "Nay, beau sir," said that sweet one,
        "ye shall not rise from your bed, for since I have caught my knight I
        shall hold talk with him. I ween well that ye are Sir Gawayne that all
        the world worships, whose honour and courtesy are so greatly praised.
        Now ye are here, and we are alone (my lord and his men being afar off,
        other men, too, are in bed, so are my maidens), and the door is safely
        closed, I shall use my time well while it lasts. Ye are welcome to my
        person to do with it as ye please, and I will be your servant" (ll.
        1208-1240).
      



        Gawayne behaves most discreetly, for the remembrance of his forthcoming
        adventure at the Green Chapel prevents him from thinking of love (ll.
        1205-1289). At last the lady takes leave of the knight by catching him
        in her arms and kissing him (ll. 1290-1307). The day passes away
        merrily, and at dusk the Lord of the castle returns from the chase. He
        presents the venison to Gawayne according to the previous covenant
        between them. Our knight gives his host a kiss as the only piece of good
        fortune that had fallen to him during the day. "It is good," says the
        other, "and would be much better if ye would tell me where ye won such
        bliss" (ll. 1308-1394). "That was not in our covenant," replies Gawayne,
        "so try me no more." After much laughing on both sides they proceed to
        supper, and afterwards, while the choice wine is being carried round,
        Gawayne and his host renew their agreement. Late at night they take
        leave of each other and hasten to their beds. "By the time that the cock
        had crowed and cackled thrice" the lord was up, and after "meat and
        mass" were over the hunters make for the woods, where they give chase to
        a wild boar who had grown old and mischievous (ll. 1395-1467).
      



        While the sportsmen are hunting this "wild swine" our lovely knight lies
        in his bed. He is not forgotten by the lady, who pays him an early
        visit, seeking to make further trial of his virtues. She sits softly by
        his side and tells him that he has forgotten what she taught him the day
        before (ll. 1468-1486). "I taught you of kissing," says she; "that
        becomes every courteous knight." Gawayne says that he must not take that
        which is forbidden him. The lady replies that he is strong enough to
        enforce his own wishes. Our knight answers that every gift not given
        with a good will is worthless. His fair visitor then enquires how it is
        that he who is so skilled in the true sport of love and so renowned a
        knight, has never talked to her of love (ll. 1487-1524). "You ought,"
        she says, "to show and teach a young thing like me some tokens of
        true-love's crafts; I come hither and sit here alone to learn of you
        some game; do teach me of your wit while my lord is from home." Gawayne
        replies that he cannot undertake the task of expounding true-love and
        tales of arms to one who has far more wisdom than he possesses. Thus did
        our knight avoid all appearance of evil, though sorely pressed to do
        what was wrong (ll. 1525-1552). The lady, having bestowed two kisses
        upon Sir Gawayne, takes her leave of him (ll. 1553-1557).
      



        At the end of the day the lord of the castle returns home with the
        shields and head of the wild boar. He shows them to his guest, who
        declares that "such a brawn of a beast, nor such sides of a swine," he
        never before has seen. Gawayne takes possession of the spoil according
        to covenant, and in return he bestows two kisses upon his host, who
        declares that his guest has indeed been rich with "such chaffer" (ll.
        1558-1647).
      



        After much persuasion, Gawayne consents to stop at the castle another
        day (ll. 1648-1685). Early on the morrow the lord and his men hasten to
        the woods, and come upon the track of a fox, the hunting of which
        affords them plenty of employment and sport (ll. 1686-1730). Meanwhile
        our good knight sleeps soundly within his comely curtains. He is again
        visited by the lady of the castle. So gaily was she attired, and so
        "faultless of her features," that great joy warmed the heart of Sir
        Gawayne. With soft and pleasant smiles "they smite into mirth," and are
        soon engaged in conversation. Had not Mary thought of her knight, he
        would have been in great peril (ll. 1731-1769). So sorely does the fair
        one press him with her love, that he fears lest he should become a
        traitor to his host. The lady enquires whether he has a mistress to whom
        he has plighted his troth. The knight swears by St John that he neither
        has nor desires one. This answer causes the dame to sigh for sorrow, and
        telling him that she must depart, she asks for some gift, if it were
        only a glove, by which she might "think on the knight and lessen her
        grief" (ll. 1770-1800). Gawayne assures her that he has nothing worthy
        of her acceptance; that he is on an "uncouth errand," and therefore has
        "no men with no mails containing precious things," for which he is truly
        sorry.
      



        Quoth that lovesome (one)—
      




          "Though I had nought of yours,
        

          Yet should ye have of mine.
        




        Thus saying, she offers him a rich ring of red gold "with a shining
        stone standing aloft," that shone like the beams of the bright sun. The
        knight refused the gift, as he had nothing to give in return. "Since ye
        refuse my ring," says the lady, "because it seems too rich, and ye would
        not be beholden to me, I shall give you my girdle that is less valuable"
        (ll. 1801-1835). But Gawayne replies that he will not accept gold or
        reward of any kind, though "ever in hot and in cold" he will be her true
        servant.
      



        "Do ye refuse it," asks the lady, "because it seems simple and of little
        value? Whoso knew the virtues that are knit therein would estimate it
        more highly. For he who is girded with this green lace cannot be wounded
        or slain by any man under heaven." The knight thinks awhile, and it
        strikes him that this would be a "jewel for the jeopardy" that he had to
        undergo at the Green Chapel. So he not only accepts the lace, but
        promises to keep the possession of it a secret (ll. 1836-1865). By that
        time the lady had kissed him thrice, and she then takes "her leave and
        leaves him there."
      



        Gawayne rises, dresses himself in noble array, and conceals the "love
        lace" where he might find it again. He then hies to mass, shrives him of
        his misdeeds, and obtains absolution. On his return to the hall he
        solaces the ladies with comely carols and all kinds of joy (ll.
        1866-1892). The dark night came, and then the lord of the castle, having
        slain the fox, returns to his "dear home," where he finds a fire
        brightly turning and his guest amusing the ladies (ll. 1893-1927).
        Gawayne, in fulfilment of his agreement, kisses his host thrice.1
        "By Christ," quoth the other knight, "ye have caught much bliss. I have
        hunted all this day and nought have I got but the skin of this foul fox
        (the devil have the goods!), and that is full poor for to pay for such
        precious things" (ll. 1928-1951).
      



        After the usual evening's entertainment, Gawayne retires to rest. The
        next morning, being New Year's day, is cold and stormy. Snow falls, and
        the dales are full of drift. Our knight in his bed locks his eyelids,
        but full little he sleeps. By each cock that crows he knows the hour,
        and before day-break he calls for his chamberlain, who quickly brings
        him his armour (ll. 1952-2014). While Gawayne clothed himself in his
        rich weeds he forgot not the "lace, the lady's gift," but with it doubly
        girded his loins. He wore it not for its rich ornaments, "but to save
        himself when it behoved him to suffer," and as a safeguard against sword
        or knife (ll. 2015-2046).
      



        Having thanked his host and all the renowned assembly for the great
        kindness he had experienced at their hands, "he steps into stirrups and
        strides aloft" (ll. 2047-2068).
      



        The drawbridge is let down, and the broad gates unbarred and borne open
        upon both sides, and the knight, after commending the castle to Christ,
        passes thereout and goes on his way accompanied by his guide, that
        should teach him to turn to that place where he should receive the
        much-dreaded blow. They climb over cliffs, where each hill had a hat and
        a mist-cloak, until the next morn, when they find themselves on a full
        high hill covered with snow. The servant bids his master remain awhile,
        saying, "I have brought you hither at this time, and now ye are not far
        from that noted place that ye have so often enquired after. The place
        that ye press to is esteemed full perilous, and there dwells a man in
        that waste the worst upon earth, for he is stiff and stern and loves to
        strike, and greater is he than any man upon middle-earth, and his body
        is bigger than the best four in Arthur's house. He keeps the Green
        Chapel; there passes none by that place, however proud in arms, that he
        does not 'ding him to death with dint of his hand.' He is a man
        immoderate and 'no mercy uses,' for be it churl or chaplain that by the
        chapel rides, monk or mass-priest, or any man else, it is as pleasant to
        him to kill them as to go alive himself. Wherefore I tell thee truly,
        'come ye there, ye be killed, though ye had twenty lives to spend. He
        has dwelt there long of yore, and on field much sorrow has wrought.
        Against his sore dints ye may not defend you' (ll. 2069-2117).
        Therefore, good Sir Gawayne, let the man alone, and for God's sake go by
        some other path, and then I shall hie me home again. I swear to you by
      



        [1 He only in part keeps to his covenant, as he holds back
        the love-lace.]
      



        God and all His saints that I will never say that ever ye attempted to
        flee from any man."
      



        Gawayne thanks his guide for his well-meant kindness, but declares that
        to the Green Chapel he will go, though the owner thereof be "a stern
        knave," for God can devise means to save his servants.
      



        "Mary!" quoth the other, "since it pleases thee to lose thy life I will
        not hinder thee. Have thy helmet on thy head, thy spear in thy hand, and
        ride down this path by yon rock-side, till thou be brought to the bottom
        of the valley. Then look a little on the plain, on thy left hand, and
        thou shalt see in that slade the chapel itself, and the burly knight
        that guards it (ll. 2118-2148). Now, farewell Gawayne the noble! for all
        the gold upon ground I would not go with thee nor bear thee fellowship
        through this wood 'on foot farther.'" Thus having spoken, he gallops
        away and leaves the knight alone.
      



        Gawayne now pursues his journey, rides through the dale, and looks
        about. He sees no signs of a resting-place, but only high and steep
        banks, and the very shadows of the high woods seemed wild and distorted.
        No chapel, however, could he discover. After a while he sees a round
        hill by the side of a stream; thither he goes, alights, and fastens his
        horse to the branch of a tree. He walks about the hill, debating with
        himself what it might be. It had a hole in the one end and on each side,
        and everywhere overgrown with grass, but whether it was only an old cave
        or a crevice of an old crag he could not tell (ll. 2149-2188).
      



        "Now, indeed," quoth Gawayne, "a desert is here; this oratory is ugly
        with herbs overgrown. It is a fitting place for the man in green to
        'deal here his devotions after the devil's manner.' Now I feel it is the
        fiend (the devil) in my five wits that has covenanted with me that he
        may destroy me. This is a chapel of misfortune—evil betide it! It
        is the most cursed kirk that ever I came in." With his helmet on his
        head, and spear in his hand, he roams up to the rock, and then he hears
        from that high hill beyond the brook a wondrous wild noise. Lo! it
        clattered in the cliff as if one upon a grindstone were grinding a
        scythe. It whirred like the water at a mill, and rushed and re-echoed,
        terrible to hear. "Though my life I forgo," says Gawayne, "no noise
        shall cause me to fear."
      



        Then he cried aloud, "Who dwells in this place, discourse with me to
        hold? For now is good Gawayne going right here if any brave wight will
        hie him hither, either now or never" (ll. 2189-2216).
      



        "Abide," quoth one on the bank above, over his head, "and thou shalt
        have all in haste that I promised thee once."
      



        Soon there comes out of a hole in the crag, with a fell weapon a Danish
        axe quite new, the "man in the green," clothed as at first as his legs,
        locks and beard. But now he is on foot and walks on the earth. When he
        reaches the stream, he hops over and boldly strides about. He meets Sir
        Gawayne, who tells him that he is quite ready to fulfil his part of the
        compact. "Gawayne," quoth that 'green gome' (man), "may God preserve
        thee! Truly thou art welcome to my place, 'and thou hast timed thy
        travel' as a true man should. Thou knowest the covenants made between
        us, at this time twelve-month, that on New Year's day I should return
        thee thy blow. We are now in this valley by ourselves, and can do as we
        please (ll. 2217-2246). Have, therefore, thy helmet off thy head, and
        'have here thy pay.' Let us have no more talk than when thou didst
        strike off my head with a single blow."
      



        "Nay, by God!" quoth Gawayne, "I shall not begrudge thee thy will for
        any harm that may happen, but will stand still while thou strikest."
      



        Then he stoops a little and shows his bare neck, unmoved by any fear.
        The Green Knight takes up his "grim tool," and with all his force raises
        it aloft, as if he meant utterly to destroy him. As the axe came gliding
        down Gawayne "shrank a little with the shoulders from the sharp iron."
        The other withheld his weapon, and then reproved the prince with many
        proud words. "Thou art not Gawayne that is so good esteemed, that never
        feared for no host by hill nor by vale, for now thou fleest for fear
        before thou feelest harm (ll. 2247-2272). Such cowardice of that knight
        did I never hear. I never flinched nor fled when thou didst aim at me in
        King Arthur's house. My head flew to my feet and yet I never fled,
        wherefore I deserve to be called the better man."
      



        Quoth Gawayne, "I shunted once, but will do so no more, though my head
        fall on the stones. But hasten and bring me to the point; deal me my
        destiny, and do it out of hand, for I shall stand thee a stroke and
        start no more until thine axe has hit me—have here my troth."
        "Have at thee, then," said the other, and heaves the axe aloft, and
        looks as savagely as if he were mad. He aims at the other mightily, but
        withholds his hand ere it might hurt. Gawayne readily abides the blow
        without flinching with any member, and stood still as a stone or a tree
        fixed in rocky ground with a hundred roots.
      



        Then merrily the other did speak, "Since now thou hast thy heart whole
        it behoves me to strike, so take care of thy neck." Gawayne answers with
        great wroth, "Thrash on, thou fierce man, thou threatenest too long; I
        believe thy own heart fails thee."
      



        "Forsooth," quoth the other, "since thou speakest so boldly, I will no
        longer delay" (ll. 2273-2304). Then, contracting "both lips and brow,"
        he made ready to strike, and let fall his axe on the bare neck of Sir
        Gawayne. "Though he hammered" fiercely, he only "severed the hide,"
        causing the blood to flow. When Gawayne saw his blood on the snow, he
        quickly seized his helmet and placed it on his head. Then he drew out
        his bright sword, and thus angrily spoke: "Cease, man, of thy blow, bid
        me no more. I have received a stroke in this place without opposition,
        but if thou givest me any more readily shall I requite thee, of that be
        thou sure. Our covenant stipulates one stroke, and therefore now cease."
      



        The Green Knight, resting on his axe, looks on Sir Gawayne, as bold and
        fearless he there stood, and then with a loud voice thus addresses the
        knight: "Bold knight, be not so wroth, no man here has wronged thee (ll.
        2305-2339); I promised thee a stroke, and thou hast it, so hold thee
        well pleased. I could have dealt much worse with thee, and caused thee
        much sorrow. Two blows I aimed at thee, for twice thou kissedst my fair
        wife; but I struck thee not, because thou restoredst them to me
        according to agreement. At the third time thou failedst, and therefore I
        have given thee that tap. That woven girdle, given thee by my own wife,
        belongs to me. I know well thy kisses, thy conduct also, and the wooing
        of my wife, for I wrought it myself. I sent her to try thee, and truly
        methinks thou art the most faultless man that ever on foot went. Still,
        sir, thou wert wanting in good faith; but as it proceeded from no
        immorality, thou being only desirous of saving thy life, the less I
        blame thee."
      



        Gawayne stood confounded, the blood rushed into his face, and he shrank
        within himself for very shame. "Cursed," he cried, "be cowardice and
        covetousness both; in you are villany and vice, that virtue destroy."
        Then he takes off the girdle and throws it to the knight in green,
        cursing his cowardice and covetousness. The Green Knight, laughing, thus
        spoke: "Thou hast confessed so clean, and acknowledged thy faults, that
        I hold thee as pure as thou hadst never forfeited since thou wast first
        born. I give thee, sir, the gold-hemmed girdle as a token of thy
        adventure at the Green Chapel. Come now to my castle, and we shall enjoy
        together the festivities of the New Year" (ll. 2340-2406).
      



        "Nay, forsooth," quoth the knight, "but for your kindness may God
        requite you. Commend me to that courteous one your comely wife, who with
        her crafts has beguiled me. But it is no uncommon thing for a man to
        come to sorrow through women's wiles; for so was Adam beguiled with one,
        and Solomon with many. Samson was destroyed by Delilah, and David
        suffered much through Bathsheba. 'It were indeed great bliss for a
        man to love them well and believe them not.' Since the greatest upon
        earth were so beguiled, methinks I should be excused. But God reward you
        for your girdle, which I will ever wear in remembrance of my fault, and
        when pride shall exalt me, a look to this love-lace shall lessen it (ll.
        2407-2438). But since ye are the lord of yonder land, from whom I have
        received so much honour, tell me truly your right name, and I shall ask
        no more questions."
      



        Quoth the other, "I am called Bernlak de Hautdesert, through might of
        Morgain la Fay, who dwells in my house. Much has she learnt of Merlin,
        who knows all your knights at home. She brought me to your hall for to
        essay the prowess of the Round Table. She wrought this wonder to bereave
        you of your wits, hoping to have grieved Guenever and affrighted her to
        death by means of the man that spoke with his head in his hand before
        the high table. She is even thine aunt, Arthur's half sister; wherefore
        come to thine aunt, for all my household love thee."
      



        Gawayne refuses to accompany the Green Knight, and so, with many
        embraces and kind wishes, they separate—the one to his castle, the
        other to Arthur's court.
      



        After passing through many wild ways, our knight recovers from the wound
        in his neck, and at last comes safe and sound to the court of King
        Arthur. Great then was the joy of all; the king and queen kiss their
        brave knight, and make many enquiries about his journey. He tells them
        of his adventures, hiding nothing—"the chance of the chapel, the
        cheer of the knight, the love of the lady, and lastly of the lace."
        Groaning for grief and shame he shows them the cut in his neck, which he
        had received for his unfaithfulness (ll. 2439-2504). The king and his
        courtiers comfort the knight—they laugh loudly at his adventures,
        and unanimously agree that those lords and ladies that belonged to the
        Round Table, and each knight of the brotherhood should ever after wear a
        bright green belt for Gawayne's sake. And he upon whom it was conferred
        honoured it evermore after.
      



        Thus in Arthur's time this adventure befell, whereof the "Brutus Books"
        bear witness (ll. 2505-2530).
      


      I need not say that the Brutus Books we possess do not contain the
      legend here set forth, though it is not much more improbable than some of
      the statements contained in them. If the reader desires to know the
      relation in which this and the like stories stand to the original Arthur
      legends, he will find it discussed in Sir F. Madden's Preface to his
      edition of "Syr Gawayne," which also contains a sketch of the very
      different views taken of Sir Gawayne by the different Romance writers.
    

      Into this and other literary questions I do not enter here, as I
      have nothing to add to Sir F. Madden's statements; but in the text of the
      Poem I have differed from him in some few readings, which will be found
      noticed in the Notes and Glossary.
    

      As the manuscript is fast fading, I am glad that the existence of the
      Early English Text Society has enabled us to secure a wider diffusion of
      its contents before the original shall be no longer legible.
    

      We want nothing but an increased supply of members to enable us to give to
      a large circle of readers many an equally interesting record of Early
      English minds.
    


      SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T.
    

      [FYTTE THE FIRST.]
    

      I.
    


[Fol. 91a.]After the siege of Troy

          Siþen þe sege & þe assaut wat3 sesed at Troye,
        

          Þe bor3 brittened & brent to bronde3 & aske3,
        

          Þe tulk þat þe trammes of tresoun þer wro3t,
        
4

          Wat3 tried for his tricherie, þe trewest on erthe;
        

          Hit wat3 Ennias þe athel, & his highe kynde,
        

          Þat siþen depreced prouinces, & patrounes bicome
        

          Welne3e of al þe wele in þe west iles,
        
Romulus built Rome, 8

          Fro riche Romulus to Rome ricchis hym swyþe,
        

          With gret bobbaunce þat bur3e he biges vpon
          fyrst,
        

          & neuenes hit his aune nome, as hit now hat;
        

          Ticius to Tuskan [turnes,] & teldes bigynnes;
        
12

          Langaberde in Lumbardie lyftes vp homes;
        
and Felix Brutus founded Britain,

          & fer ouer þe French flod Felix Brutus


          On mony bonkkes ful brode Bretayn he sette3,
        

          wyth wynne;
        
a land of war and wonder, 16

          Where werre, & wrake, & wonder,
        

          Bi syþe3 hat3 wont þer-inne,
        
and oft of bliss and blunder.

          & oft boþe blysse & blunder
        

          Ful skete hat3 skyfted synne.
        



      II.
    


20

          Ande quen þis Bretayn wat3 bigged bi þis burn rych,
        
Bold men increased in the Land,

          Bolde bredden þer-inne, baret þat lofden,
        

          In mony turned tyme tene þat wro3ten;
        

          Mo ferlyes on þis folde han fallen here oft
        
and many marvels happened. 24

          Þen in any oþer þat I wot, syn þat ilk tyme.
        
Of all Britain's kings Arthur was the noblest.

          Bot of alle þat here bult of Bretaygne kynges
        

          Ay wat3 Arthur þe hendest; as I haf herde telle;
        
[Fol. 91b.]

          For-þi an aunter in erde I attle to schawe,
        
28

          Þat a selly in si3t summe men hit holden,
        

          & an outtrage awenture of Arthure3 wondere3;
        
Listen a while and ye shall hear the story of an
        "outrageous adventure."

          If 3e wyl lysten þis laye bot on littel quile,
        

          I schal telle hit, as-tit, as I in toun herde,
        
32

          with tonge;
        

          As hit is stad & stoken,
        

          In stori stif & stronge,
        

          With lel letteres loken,
        
36

          In londe so hat3 ben longe.
        



      III.
    


Arthur held at Camelot his Christmas feast,

          Þis kyng lay at Camylot vpon kryst-masse,
        

          With mony luflych lorde, lede3 of þe best,
        
with all the knights of the Round Table,

          Rekenly of þe rounde table alle þo rich breþer,
        
40

          With rych reuel ory3t, & rechles merþes;
        

          Þer tournayed tulkes bi-tyme3 ful mony,
        

          Iusted ful Iolilé þise gentyle kni3tes,
        

          Syþen kayred to þe court, caroles to make.
        
full fifteen days. 44

          For þer þe fest wat3 ilyche ful fiften dayes,
        

          With alle þe mete & þe mirþe þat men couþe a-vyse;
        

          Such glaumande gle glorious to here,
        

          Dere dyn vp-on day, daunsyng on ny3tes,
        
All was joy in hall and chamber, 48

          Al wat3 hap vpon he3e in halle3 & chambre3,
        

          With lorde3 & ladies, as leuest him þo3t;
        

          With all þe wele of þe worlde þay woned þer samen,
        
among brave knights and lovely ladies,

          Þe most kyd kny3te3 vnder kryste seluen,
        
52

          & þe louelokkest ladies þat euer lif haden,
        

          & he þe comlokest kyng þat þe court haldes;
        

          For al wat3 þis fayre folk in her first age,
        

          on sille;
        
the happiest under heaven. 56

          Þe hapnest vnder heuen,
        

          Kyng hy3est mon of wylle,
        

          Hit were1 now gret nye to neuen


          So hardy a here on hille.
        


1 MS. werere.
      


      IV.
    


They celebrate the New Year with great joy.
60

          Wyle nw 3er wat3 so 3ep þat hit wat3 nwe cummen,
        

          Þat day doubble on þe dece wat3 þe douth serued,
        

          Fro þe kyng wat3 cummen with kny3tes
          in to þe halle,
        

          Þe chauntre of þe chapel cheued to an ende;
        
64

          Loude crye wat3 þer kest of clerke3 & oþer,
        
[Fol. 92]

          Nowel nayted o-newe, neuened ful ofte;
        

          & syþen riche forth runnen to reche honde-selle,
        
Gifts are demanded and bestowed.

          3e3ed 3eres 3iftes on hi3, 3elde hem bi hond,
        
68

          Debated busyly aboute þo giftes;
        

          Ladies la3ed ful loude, þo3 þay lost haden,
        

          & he þat wan wat3 not wrothe, þat may 3e wel trawe.
        
Lords and ladies take their seats at the table.

          Alle þis mirþe þay maden to þe mete tyme;
        
72

          When þay had waschen, worþyly þay wenten to sete,
        

          Þe best burne ay abof, as hit best semed;
        
Queen Guenever appears gaily dressed.

          Whene Guenore ful gay, grayþed in þe myddes.
        

          Dressed on þe dere des, dubbed al aboute,
        
76

          Smal sendal bisides, a selure hir ouer


          Of tryed Tolouse, of Tars tapites in-noghe,
        

          Þat were enbrawded & beten wyth þe best gemmes,
        

          Þat my3t be preued of prys wyth penyes to bye,
        
80

          in daye;
        
A lady fairer of form might no one say he had
        ever before seen.

          Þe comlokest to discrye,
        

          Þer glent with y3en gray,
        

          A semloker þat euer he sy3e,
        
84

          Soth mo3t no mon say.
        



      V.
    


Arthur would not eat,

          Bot Arthure wolde not ete til al were serued,
        

          He wat3 so Ioly of his Ioyfnes, & sum-quat child gered,
        

          His lif liked hym ly3t, he louied þe lasse
        
nor would he long sit 88

          Auþer to lenge lye, or to longe sitte,
        

          So bi-sied him his 3onge blod & his brayn wylde;
        

          & also anoþer maner meued him eke,
        

          Þat he þur3 nobelay had nomen, ho wolde neuer ete
        
92

          Vpon such a dere day, er hym deuised were
        
until he had witnessed a "wondrous adventure" of
        some kind.

          Of sum auenturus þyng an vncouþe tale,
        

          Of sum mayn meruayle, þat he my3t trawe,
        

          Of1 alderes, of armes, of oþer auenturus,
        
96

          Oþer sum segg hym bi-so3t of sum siker kny3t,
        

          To Ioyne wyth hym in iustyng in Iopardé to lay,
        

          Lede lif for lyf, leue vchon oþer,
        

          As fortune wolde fulsun hom þe fayrer to haue.
        
100

          Þis wat3 [þe] kynges countenaunce where he in
          court were,
        

          At vch farand fest among his fre meny,
        
[Fol. 92b.]

          in halle;
        
He of face so bold makes much mirth with all.

          Þer-fore of face so fere.
        
104

          He sti3tle3 stif in stalle,
        

          Ful 3ep in þat nw 3ere,
        

          Much mirthe he mas with alle.
        


1 Of of, in MS.
      


      VI.
    


The king talks with his knights.

          Thus þer stondes in stale þe stif kyng
          his-seluen,
        
108

          Talkkande bifore þe hy3e table of trifles ful hende
        
Gawayne,

          There gode Gawan wat3 grayþed, Gwenore bisyde
        
Agravayn,

          & Agrauayn a la dure mayn on þat oþer syde sittes
        

          Boþe þe kynges sister sunes, & ful siker
          kni3tes;
        
Bishop Bawdewyn, 112

          Bischop Bawdewyn abof bi-gine3 þe table,
        
and Ywain sit on the dais.

          & Ywan, Vryn son, ette wit hym-seluen;
        

          Þise were di3t on þe des, & derworþly serued,
        

          & siþen mony siker segge at þe sidborde3.
        
The first course is served with cracking of
        trumpets. 116

          Þen þe first cors come with crakkyng of trumpes,
        

          Wyth mony baner ful bry3t, þat þer-bi henged,
        

          Nwe nakryn noyse with þe noble pipes,
        

          Wylde werbles & wy3t wakned lote,
        
120

          Þat mony hert ful hi3e hef at her towches;
        
It consisted of all dainties in season.

          Dayntes dryuen þer-wyth of ful dere metes,
        

          Foysoun of þe fresche, & on so fele disches,
        

          Þat pine to fynde þe place þe peple bi-forne
        
124

          For to sette þe syluener,1 þat sere sewes halden,
        

          on clothe;
        

          Iche lede as he loued hym-selue
        

          Þer laght with-outen loþe,
        
Each two had dishes twelve, 128

          Ay two had disches twelue,
        
good beer and bright wine both.

          Good ber, & bry3t wyn boþe.
        


1 svlueren (?) (dishes).
      


      VII.
    


There was no want of anything.

          Now wyl I of hor seruise say yow no more,
        

          For veh wy3e may wel wit no wont þat þer were;
        
Scarcely had the first course commenced,
132

          An oþer noyse ful newe ne3ed biliue,
        

          Þat þe lude my3t haf leue lif-lode to cach.
        

          For vneþe wat3 þe noyce not a whyle sesed,
        

          & þe fyrst cource in þe court kyndely serued,
        
when there rushes in at the hall-door a knight;
136

          Þer hales in at þe halle dor an aghlich mayster,
        

          On þe most on þe molde on mesure hyghe;
        

          Fro þe swyre to þe swange so sware & so þik,
        
the tallest on earth

          & his lyndes & his lymes so longe & so grete,
        
[Fol. 93.] 140

          Half etayn in erde I hope þat he were.
        
he must have been.

          Bot mon most I algate mynn hym to bene,
        

          & þat þe myriest in his muckel þat my3t ride;
        
His back and breast were great,

          For of bak & of brest al were his bodi sturne,
        
but his belly and waist were small. 144

          Bot his wombe & his wast were worthily smale,
        

          & alle his fetures fol3ande, in forme þat he hade,
        

          ful clene;
        

          For wonder of his hwe men hade,
        
148

          Set in his semblaunt sene;
        

          He ferde as freke were fade,
        

          & ouer-al enker grene.
        



      VIII.
    


He was clothed entirely in green.

          Ande al grayþed in grene þis gome & his wedes,
        
152

          A strayt cote ful stre3t, þat stek on his sides,
        

          A mere mantile abof, mensked with-inne,
        

          With pelure pured apert þe pane ful clene,
        

          With blyþe blaunner ful bry3t, & his
          hod boþe,
        
156

          Þat wat3 la3t fro his lokke3, & layde on his schulderes
        

          Heme wel haled, hose of þat same grene,
        
His spurs were of bright gold.

          Þat spenet on his sparlyr, & clene spures vnder,
        

          Of bry3t golde, vpon silk bordes, barred ful ryche
        
160

          & scholes vnder schankes, þere þe schalk rides;
        

          & alle his vesture uerayly wat3 clene verdure,
        

          Boþe þe barres of his belt & oþer blyþe stones,
        

          Þat were richely rayled in his aray clene,
        
His saddle was embroidered with birds and flies.
164

          Aboutte hym-self & his sadel, vpon silk werke3,
        

          Þat were to tor for to telle of tryfles þe halue,
        

          Þat were enbrauded abof, wyth bryddes & fly3es,
        

          With gay gaudi of grene, þe golde ay in myddes;
        
168

          Þe pendauntes of his payttrure, þe proude cropure
        

          His molaynes, & alle þe metail anamayld was þenne
        

          Þe steropes þat he stod on, stayned of þe same,
        

          & his arsoun3 al after, & his aþel sturtes,
        
172

          Þat euer glemered1 & glent al of grene stones.
        
The foal that he rode upon was green;

          Þe fole þat he ferkkes on, fyn of þat ilke,
        

          sertayn;
        

          A grene hors gret & þikke,
        
it was a steed full stiff to guide. 176

          A stede ful stif to strayne,
        

          In brawden brydel quik,
        
[Fol. 93b.]

          To þe gome he wat3 ful gayn.
        


1 glemed (?).
      


      IX.
    


Gaily was the knight attired.

          Wel gay wat3 þis gome gered in grene,
        
180

          & þe here of his hed of his hors swete;
        

          Fayre fannand fax vmbe-foldes his schulderes;
        
His great beard, like a bush, hung on his breast.

          A much berd as1 a busk ouer his brest henges,
        

          Þat wyth his hi3lich here, þat of his hed reches,
        
184

          Wat3 euesed al vmbe-torne, a-bof his elbowes,
        

          Þat half his armes þer vnder were halched in þe wyse
        

          Of a kynge3 capados, þat closes his swyre.
        
The horse's mane was decked with golden threads.

          Þe mane of þat mayn hors much to hit lyke,
        
188

          Wel cresped & cemmed wyth knottes ful mony,
        

          Folden in wyth fildore aboute þe fayre grene,
        

          Ay a herle of þe here, an oþer of golde;
        
Its tail was bound with a green band.

          Þe tayl & his toppyng twynnen of a sute,
        
192

          & bounden boþe wyth a bande of a bry3t grene,
        

          Dubbed wyth ful dere stone3, as þe dok lasted,
        

          Syþen þrawen wyth a þwong a þwarle knot alofte,
        

          Þer mony belle3 ful bry3t of brende golde rungen.
        
Such a foal nor a knight were never before seen.
196

          Such a fole vpon folde, ne freke þat hym rydes,
        

          Wat3 neuer sene in þat sale wyth sy3t er þat tyme,
        

          with y3e;
        

          He loked as layt so ly3t,
        
200

          So sayd al þat hym sy3e,
        
It seemed that no man might endure his dints.

          Hit semed as no mon my3t,
        

          Vnder his dyntte3 dry3e.
        


1 as as, in MS.
      


      X.
    


The knight carried neither spear nor shield,

          Wheþer hade he no helme ne hawb[e]rgh nauþer,
        
204

          Ne no pysan, ne no plate þat pented to armes,
        

          Ne no schafte, ne no schelde, to schwne ne to smyte,
        
In one hand was a holly bough,

          Bot in his on honde he hade a holyn bobbe,
        

          Þat is grattest in grene, when greue3 ar bare,
        
in the other an axe, 208

          & an ax in his oþer, a hoge & vn-mete,
        

          A spetos sparþe to expoun in spelle quo-so my3t;
        

          Þe hede of an eln3erde þe large lenkþe hade,
        

          Þe grayn al of grene stele & of golde hewen,
        
the edge of which was as keen as a sharp razor,
212

          Þe bit burnyst bry3t, with a brod egge,
        

          As wel schapen to schere as scharp rasores;
        

          Þe stele of a stif staf þe sturne hit bi-grypte,
        
[Fol. 94.]

          Þat wat3 wounden wyth yrn to þe wande3 ende,
        
and the handle was encased in iron, curiously
        "graven with green, in gracious works." 216

          & al bigrauen with grene, in gracios1
          werkes;
        

          A lace lapped aboute, þat louked at þe hede,
        

          & so after þe halme halched ful ofte,
        

          Wyth tryed tassele3 þerto tacched in-noghe,
        
Thus arrayed the Green Knight enters the hall,
220

          On botoun3 of þe bry3t grene brayden ful ryche.
        

          Þis haþel helde3 hym in, & þe halle entres,
        

          Driuande to þe he3e dece, dut he no woþe,
        
without saluting any one.

          Haylsed he neuer one, bot he3e he ouer loked.
        
224

          Þe fyrst word þat he warp, "wher is," he sayd,
        
He asks for the "governor" of the company,

          "Þe gouernour of þis gyng? gladly I wolde
        

          Se þat segg in sy3t, & with hym self
          speke
        

          raysoun."
        
228

          To kny3te3 he kest his y3e,
        

          & reled hym vp & doun,
        
and looks for the most renowned.

          He stemmed & con studie,
        

          Quo walt þer most renoun.
        


1 looks like gracons in MS.
      


      XI.
    


Much they marvel to see a man and a horse
232

          Ther wat3 lokyng on lenþe, þe lude to be-holde,
        

          For vch mon had meruayle quat hit mene my3t,
        

          Þat a haþel & a horse my3t such a hwe lach,
        
as green as grass.

          As growe grene as þe gres & grener hit semed,
        
236

          Þen grene aumayl on golde lowande bry3ter;
        

          Al studied þat þer stod, & stalked hym nerre,
        
Never before had they seen such a sight as this.

          Wyth al þe wonder of þe worlde, what he worch schulde.
        

          For fele sellye3 had þay sen, bot such neuer are,
        
240

          For-þi for fantoum & fayry3e þe folk þere hit demed;
        
They were afraid to answer,

          Þer-fore to answare wat3 ar3e mony aþel freke,
        

          & al stouned at his steuen, & stonstil seten,
        
and were as silent as if sleep had taken
        possession of them;

          In a swoghe sylence þur3 þe sale riche
        
244

          As al were slypped vpon slepe so slaked hor lote3
        

          in hy3e;
        

          I deme hit not al for doute,
        
some from fear and others from courtesy.

          Bot sum for cortaysye,
        
248

          Bot let hym þat al schulde loute,
        

          Cast vnto þat wy3e.
        



      XII.
    


Arthur salutes the Green Knight.

          Þenn Arþour bifore þe hi3 dece þat auenture byholde3,
        

          & rekenly hym reuerenced, for rad was he neuer,
        
252

          & sayde, "wy3e, welcum iwys to þis place,
        
[Fol. 94b.]bids him welcome, and
        invites him to stay awhile.

          Þe hede of þis ostel Arthour I hat,
        

          Li3t luflych adoun, & lenge, I þe praye,
        

          & quat so þy wylle is, we schal wyt after."
        
The knight says that he will not tarry.
256

          "Nay, as help me," quod þe haþel, "he þat on hy3e syttes,
        

          To wone any quyle in þis won, hit wat3 not myn ernde;
        

          Bot for þe los of þe lede is lyft vp so hy3e,
        

          & þy bur3 & þy burnes best ar holden,
        
260

          Stifest vnder stel-gere on stedes to ryde,
        
He seeks the most valiant that he may prove him.

          Þe wy3test & þe worþyest of þe worldes kynde,
        

          Preue for to play wyth in oþer pure layke3;
        

          & here is kydde cortaysye, as I haf herd carp,
        
264

          & þat hat3 wayned me hider, I-wyis, at þis tyme.
        

          3e may be seker bi þis braunch þat I bere here,
        
He comes in peace.

          Þat I passe as in pes, & no ply3t seche;
        

          For had I founded in fere, in fe3tyng
          wyse,
        
At home, however, he has both shield and spear.
268

          I haue a hauberghe at home & a helme boþe,
        

          A schelde, & a scharp spere, schinande bry3t,
        

          Ande oþer weppenes to welde, I wene wel als,
        

          Bot for I wolde no were, my wede3 ar softer.
        
272

          Bot if þou be so bold as alle burne3 tellen,
        

          Þou wyl grant me godly þe gomen þat I ask,
        

          bi ry3t."
        
Arthur assures him that he shall not fail to find
        an opponent worthy of him.

          Arthour con onsware,
        
276

          & sayd, "sir cortays kny3t,
        

          If þou craue batayl bare,
        

          Here fayle3 þou not to fy3t."
        



      XIII.
    


"I seek no fight," says the knight.

          "Nay, frayst I no fy3t, in fayth I þe telle,
        
"'Here are only beardless children.' 280

          Hit arn aboute on þis bench bot berdle3 chylder;
        

          If I were hasped in armes on a he3e stede,
        
Here is no man to match me.

          Here is no mon me to mach, for my3te3 so1 wayke.
        

          For-þy I craue in þis court a crystmas gomen,
        
Here are brave ones many, 284

          For hit is 3ol & nwe 3er, & here ar 3ep mony;
        

          If any so hardy in þis hous holde3 hym-seluen,
        
if any be bold enough to 'strike a stroke for
        another,'

          Be so bolde in his blod, brayn in hys hede,
        

          Þat dar stifly strike a strok for an oþer,
        
288

          I schal gif hym of my gyft þys giserne ryche,
        
this axe shall be his;

          Þis ax, þat is heué in-nogh, to hondele as hym
          lykes,
        
[Fol. 95.]

          & I schal bide þe fyrst bur, as bare as I sitte.
        

          If any freke be so felle to fonde þat I telle,
        
292

          Lepe ly3tly me to, & lach þis weppen,
        

          I quit clayme hit for euer, kepe hit as his auen,
        
but I shall give him a 'stroke' in return

          & I schal stonde hym a strok, stif on þis flet,
        

          Elle3 þou wyl di3t me þe dom to dele hym an oþer,
        
296

          barlay;
        

          & 3et gif hym respite,
        
within a twelvemonth and a day."

          A twelmonyth & a day;—
        

          Now hy3e, & let se tite
        
300

          Dar any her-inne o3t say."
        


1 MS. fo.
      


      XIV.
    


Fear kept all silent.

          If he hem stowned vpon fyrst, stiller were þanne
        

          Alle þe hered-men in halle, þe hy3 & þe lo3e;
        
The knight rolled his red eyes about,

          Þe renk on his rounce hym ruched in his sadel,
        
304

          & runisch-ly his rede y3en he reled aboute,
        
and bent his bristly green brows.

          Bende his bresed bro3e3, bly-cande grene,
        
Waving his beard awhile, he exclaimed:

          Wayued his berde for to wayte quo-so wolde ryse.
        

          When non wolde kepe hym with carp he co3ed ful
          hy3e,
        
308

          Ande rimed hym ful richley, & ry3t hym to
          speke:
        
"What! is this Arthur's court?

          "What, is þis Arþures hous," quod þe haþel þenne,
        

          "Þat al þe rous rennes of, þur3 ryalmes so mony?
        

          Where is now your sourquydrye & your conquestes,
        
312

          Your gry[n]del-layk, & your greme, & your
          grete wordes?
        
Forsooth the renown of the Round Table is
        overturned 'with a word of one man's speech.'"

          Now is þe reuel & þe renoun of þe rounde table
        

          Ouer-walt wyth a worde of on wy3es speche;
        

          For al dares for drede, with-oute dynt schewed!"
        
316

          Wyth þis he la3es so loude, þat þe lorde greued;
        
Arthur blushes for shame.

          Þe blod schot for scham in-to his schyre face
        

          & lere;
        
He waxes as wroth as the wind.

          He wex as wroth as wynde,
        
320

          So did alle þat þer were
        

          Þe kyng as kene bi kynde,
        

          Þen stod þat stif mon nere.
        



      XV.
    


He assures the knight that no one is afraid of
        his great words.

          Ande sayde, "haþel, by heuen þyn askyng is nys,
        
324

          & as þou foly hat3 frayst, fynde þe be-houes;
        

          I know no gome þat is gast of þy grete wordes.
        

          Gif me now þy geserne, vpon gode3 halue,
        

          & I schal bayþen þy bone, þat þou boden habbes."
        
[Fol. 95b.] 328

          Ly3tly lepe3 he hym to, & la3t at his honde;
        

          Þen feersly þat oþer freke vpon fote ly3tis.
        
Arthur seizes his axe.

          Now hat3 Arthure his axe, & þe halme grype3,
        

          & sturnely sture3 hit aboute, þat stryke wyth hit þo3t.
        
332

          Þe stif mon hym bifore stod vpon hy3t,
        

          Herre þen ani in þe hous by þe hede & more;
        
The knight, stroking his beard, awaits the blow,
        and with a "dry countenance" draws down his coat.

          Wyth sturne schere1 þer he stod, he stroked his berde,
        

          & wyth a countenaunce dry3e he dro3 doun his
          cote,
        
336

          No more mate ne dismayd for hys mayn dinte3,
        

          Þen any burne vpon bench hade bro3t hym to drynk
        

          of wyne,
        
Sir Gawayne beseeches the king to let him
        undertake the blow.

          Gawan, þat sate bi þe quene,
        
340

          To þe kyng he can enclyne,
        

          "I be-seche now with sa3e3 sene,
        

          Þis melly mot be myne."
        


1 chere (?).
      


      XVI.
    



          "Wolde 3e, worþilych lorde," quod Gawan to þe kyng,
        
He asks permission to leave the table; he says,
344

          "Bid me bo3e fro þis benche, & stonde by yow þere,
        

          Þat I wyth-oute vylanye my3t voyde þis table,
        

          & þat my legge lady lyked not ille,
        

          I wolde com to your counseyl, bifore your cort
          ryche.
        
it is not meet that Arthur should be active in
        the matter, 348

          For me þink hit not semly, as hit is soþ knawen,
        

          Þer such an askyng is heuened so hy3e in your
          sale,
        

          Þa33e 3our-self be talenttyf to take hit to your-seluen,
        
while so many bold ones sit upon bench.

          Whil mony so bolde yow aboute vpon bench sytten,
        
352

          Þat vnder heuen, I hope, non ha3er er of wylle,
        

          Ne better bodyes on bent, þer baret is rered;
        
Although the weakest, he is quite ready to meet
        the Green Knight.

          I am þe wakkest, I wot, and of wyt feblest,
        

          & lest lur of my lyf, quo laytes þe soþe,
        
356

          Bot for as much as 3e ar myn em, I am only to prayse,
        

          No bounté bot your blod I in my bodé knowe;
        

          & syþen þis note is so nys, þat no3t hit yow falles,
        

          & I haue frayned hit at yow fyrst, folde3 hit to me,
        
360

          & if I carp not comlyly, let alle þis cort rych,
        

          bout blame."
        
The nobles entreat Arthur to "give Gawayne the
        game."

          Ryche to-geder con roun,
        

          & syþen þay redden alle same,
        
364

          To ryd þe kyng wyth croun,
        

          & gif Gawan þe game.
        



      XVII.
    


[Fol. 96.]

          Þen comaunded þe kyng þe kny3t for to ryse;
        

          & he ful radly vp ros, & ruchched hym fayre,
        
The king gives his nephew his weapon,
368

          Kneled doun bifore þe kyng, & cache3 þat weppen;
        

          & he luflyly hit hym laft, & lyfte vp his honde,
        

          & gef hym godde3 blessyng, & gladly hym
          biddes
        
and tells him to keep heart and hand steady.

          Þat his hert & his honde schulde hardi be boþe.
        
372

          "Kepe þe cosyn," quod þe kyng, "þat þou on kyrf
          sette,
        

          & if þou rede3 hym ry3t, redly I trowe,
        

          Þat þou schal byden þe bur þat he schal bede after.
        

          Gawan got3 to þe gome, with giserne in honde,
        
376

          & he baldly hym byde3, he bayst neuer þe helder
        
The Green Knight enquires the name of his
        opponent.

          Þen carppe3 to sir Gawan þe kny3t in þe grene,
        

          "Refourme we oure for-wardes, er we fyrre passe.
        

          Fyrst I eþe þe, haþel, how þat þou hattes,
        
380

          Þat þou me telle truly, as I tryst may?"
        
Sir Gawayne tells him his name, and declares that
        he is willing to give and receive a blow.

          "In god fayth," quod þe goode kny3t, "Gawan I hatte,
        

          Þat bede þe þis buffet, quat-so bi-falle3 after,
        

          & at þis tyme twelmonyth take at þe anoþer,
        
384

          Wyth what weppen so1 þou wylt, & wyth no wy3
          elle3,
        

          on lyue."
        

          Þat oþer on-sware3 agayn,
        

          "Sir Gawan, so mot I þryue,
        
The other thereof is glad. 388

          As I am ferly fayn.
        

          Þis dint þat þou schal dryue."
        


1 MS. fo.
      


      XVIII.
    


"It pleases me well, Sir Gawayne," says the Green
        Knight, "that I shall receive a blow from thy fist; but thou must swear
        that thou wilt seek me,

          "Bigog," quod þe grene kny3t, "sir Gawan, melykes,
        

          Þat I schal fange at þy fust þat I haf frayst here;
        
392

          & þou hat3 redily rehersed, bi resoun ful trwe,
        

          Clanly al þe couenaunt þat I þe kynge asked,
        

          Saf þat þou schal siker me, segge, bi þi trawþe,
        

          Þat þou schal seche me þi-self, where-so þou hopes
        
396

          I may be funde vpon folde, & foch þe such wages
        
to receive the blow in return."

          As þou deles me to day, bifore þis douþe ryche."
        
"Where shall I seek thee?" says Sir Gawayne;

          "Where schulde I wale þe," quod Gauan, "where is þy place?
        

          I wot neuer where þou wonyes, bi hym þat me
          wro3t,
        
400

          Ne I know not þe, kny3t, þy cort, ne þi name.
        
"tell me thy name and abode and I will find
        thee."

          Bot teche me truly þer-to, & telle me howe þou hattes,
        

          & I schal ware alle my wyt to wynne me þeder,
        
[Fol. 96b.]

          & þat I swere þe for soþe, & by my seker traweþ."
        
404

          "Þat is in-nogh in nwe 3er, hit nedes no more,"
        

          Quod þe gome in þe grene to Gawan þe hende,
        
"When thou hast smitten me," says the knight,
        "then tell I thee of my home and name;

          "3if I þe telle trwly, quen I þe tape haue,
        

          & þou me smoþely hat3 smyten, smartly I þe teche
        
408

          Of my hous, & my home, & myn owen nome,
        

          Þen may þou frayst my fare, & forwarde3 holde,
        
if I speak not at all, so much the better for
        thee.

          & if I spende no speche, þenne spede3 þou þe better,
        

          For þou may leng in þy londe, & layt no fyrre,
        
412

          bot slokes;
        
Take now thy grim tool, and let us see how thou
        knockest."

          Ta now þy grymme tole to þe,
        

          & let se how þou cnoke3."
        

          "Gladly sir, for soþe,"
        
416

          Quod Gawan; his ax he strokes.
        



      XIX.
    


The Green Knight

          The grene kny3t vpon grounde grayþely hym dresses,
        

          A littel lut with þe hede, þe lere he discouere3,
        
puts his long lovely locks aside and lays bare
        his neck.

          His longe louelych lokke3 he layd ouer his croun.
        
420

          Let þe naked nec to þe note schewe.
        

          Gauan gripped to his ax, & gederes hit on hy3t,
        

          Þe kay fot on þe folde he be-fore sette,
        
Sir Gawayne lets fall his axe

          Let hit doun ly3tly ly3t on þe naked,
        
424

          Þat þe scharp of þe schalk schyndered þe bones,
        
and severs the head from the body.

          & schrank þur3 þe schyire grece, & scade hit in
          twynne,
        

          Þat þe bit of þe broun stel bot on þe grounde.
        
The head falls to the earth.

          Þe fayre hede fro þe halce hit [felle] to þe erþe,
        
Many kick it aside with their feet. 428

          Þat fele hit foyned wyth her fete, þere hit forth roled;
        

          Þe blod brayd fro þe body, þat blykked on þe grene;
        
The knight never falters;

          & nawþer faltered ne fel þe freke neuer þe helder,
        

          Bot styþly he start forth vpon styf schonkes,
        
he rushes forth, seizes his head, 432

          & ru[n]yschly he ra3t out, þere as renkke3 stoden,
        

          La3t to his lufly hed, & lyft hit vp sone;
        

          & syþen bo3e3 to his blonk, þe brydel he cachche3,
        
steps into the saddle,

          Steppe3 in to stel bawe & stryde3 alofte,
        
holding the while the head in his hand by the
        hair, 436

          & his hede by þe here in his honde halde3;
        

          & as sadly þe segge hym in his sadel sette,
        

          As non vnhap had hym ayled, þa3 hedle3 he1 we[re],
        

          in stedde;
        
and turns his horse about. 440

          He brayde his bluk2 aboute,
        
[Fol. 97.]

          Þat vgly bodi þat bledde,
        

          Moni on of hym had doute,
        

          Bi þat his resoun3 were redde.
        


1 MS. ho. 2 blunk (?).
      


      XX.
    


444

          For þe hede in his honde he halde3 vp euen,
        
The head lifts up its eyelids,

          To-ward þe derrest on þe dece he dresse3 þe face,
        

          & hit lyfte vp þe y3e-lydde3, & loked ful brode,
        
and addresses Sir Gawayne; "Look thou, be ready
        to go as thou hast promised,

          & meled þus much with his muthe, as 3e may
          now here.
        
448

          "Loke, Gawan, þou be grayþe to go as þou hette3,
        

          & layte as lelly til þou me, lude, fynde,
        
and seek till thou findest me.

          As þou hat3 hette in þis halle, herande þise kny3tes;
        
Get thee to the Green Chapel,

          To þe grene chapel þou chose, I charge þe to fotte,
        
452

          Such a dunt as þou hat3 dalt disserued þou habbe3,
        
there to receive a blow on New Year's morn.

          To be 3ederly 3olden on nw 3eres morn;
        

          Þe kny3t of þe grene chapel men knowen me mony;
        
Fail thou never;

          For-þi me forto fynde if þou frayste3, fayle3 þou neuer,
        
come, or recreant be called." 456

          Þer-fore com, oþer recreaunt be calde þe be-houeus."
        

          With a runisch rout þe rayne3 he torne3,
        
The Green Knight then rushes out of the hall, his
        head in his hand.

          Halled out at þe hal-dor, his hed in his hande,
        

          Þat þe fyr of þe flynt fla3e fro fole houes.
        
460

          To quat kyth he be-com, knwe non þere,
        

          Neuermore þen þay wyste fram queþen he wat3 wonnen;
        

          what þenne?
        

          Þe kyng & Gawen þare,
        
At that green one Arthur and Gawayne "laugh and
        grin." 464

          At þat grene þay la3e & grenne,
        

          3et breued wat3 hit ful bare,
        

          A meruayl among þo menne.
        



      XXI.
    


Arthur addresses the queen:

          Þa3 Arþer þe hende kyng at hert hade wonder,
        
468

          He let no semblaunt be sene, bot sayde ful hy3e
        

          To þe comlych quene, wyth cortays speche,
        
"Dear dame, be not dismayed; such marvels well
        become the Christmas festival;

          "Dere dame, to day demay yow neuer;
        

          Wel by-commes such craft vpon cristmasse,
        
472

          Laykyng of enterlude3, to la3e & to syng.
        

          Among þise, kynde caroles of kny3te3 & ladye3;
        
I may now go to meat.

          Neuer-þe-lece to my mete I may me wel dres,
        

          For I haf sen a selly, I may not for-sake."
        
476

          He glent vpon sir Gawen, & gaynly he sayde,
        
Sir Gawayne, hang up thine axe.

          "Now sir, heng vp þyn ax, þat hat3 in-nogh hewen."
        
[Fol. 97b.]

          & hit wat3 don abof þe dece, on doser to henge,
        

          Þer alle men for meruayl my3t on hit loke,
        
480

          & bi trwe tytel þer-of to telle þe wonder.
        
The king and his knights sit feasting at the
        board till day is ended.

          Þenne þay bo3ed to a borde þise burnes to-geder,
        

          Þe kyng & þe gode kny3t, & kene men hem
          serued
        

          Of alle dayntye3 double, as derrest my3t falle,
        
484

          Wyth alle maner of mete & mynstralcie boþe;
        

          Wyth wele walt þay þat day, til worþed an ende,
        

          in londe.
        
Now beware, Sir Gawayne, lest thou fail to seek
        the adventure that thou hast taken in hand.

          Now þenk wel, sir Gawan,
        
488

          For woþe þat þou ne wonde,
        

          Þis auenture forto frayn,
        

          Þat þou hat3 tan on honde.
        



      [FYTTE THE SECOND.]
    

      I.
    


This marvel serves to keep up a brisk
        conversation in Court.

          This hanselle hat3 Arthur of auenturus on fyrst,
        
492

          In 3onge 3er, for he 3erned 3elpyng to here,
        

          Tha3 hym worde3 were wane, when þay to sete wenten;
        

          Now ar þay stoken of sturne werk staf-ful her hond.
        

          Gawan wat3 glad to be-gynne þose gomne3 in halle,
        
496

          Bot þa3 þe ende be heuy, haf 3e no wonder;
        

          For þa3 men ben mery in mynde, quen þay han mayn drynk,
        
The year passes full quickly and never returns.

          A 3ere 3ernes ful 3erne, & 3elde3 neuer lyke,
        

          Þe forme to þe fynisment folde3 ful selden.
        
500

          For-þi þis 3ol ouer-3ede, & þe 3ere after,
        

          & vche sesoun serlepes sued after oþer;
        
After Christmas comes the "crabbed Lenten."

          After crysten-masse com þe crabbed lentoun,
        

          Þat frayste3 flesch wyth þe fysche & fode more symple
        
504

          Bot þenne þe weder of þe worlde wyth wynter hit þrepe3,
        
Spring sets in and warm showers descend;

          Colde clenge3 adoun, cloude3 vp-lyften,
        

          Schyre schede3 þe rayn in schowre3 ful warme,
        

          Falle3 vpon fayre flat, flowre3 þere schewen,
        
the groves become green, 508

          Boþe grounde3 & þe greue3 grene ar her wede3,
        
birds build and sing,

          Brydde3 busken to bylde, & bremlych syngen,
        
for joy of the summer that follows;

          For solace of þe softe somer þat sues þer after,
        

          bi bonk;
        
blossoms begin to bloom, 512

          & blossume3 bolne to blowe,
        

          Bi rawe3 rych & ronk,
        
and noble notes are heard in the woods

          Þen note3 noble in-no3e,
        
[Fol. 98]

          Ar herde in wod so wlonk.
        



      II.
    


Then the soft winds of summer, 516

          After þe sesoun of somer wyth þe soft wynde3,
        

          Quen 3eferus syfle3 hym-self on sede3 & erbe3,
        
beautiful are the flowers wet with dew-drops.

          Wela-wynne is þe wort þat woxes þer-oute.
        

          When þe donkande dewe drope3 of þe leue3,
        
520

          To bide a blysful blusch of þe bry3t sunne.
        
But harvest approaches soon,

          Bot þen hy3es heruest, & hardenes hym sone.
        

          Warne3 hym for þe wynter to wax ful rype;
        
and drives the dust about.

          He dryues wyth dro3t þe dust for to ryse.
        
524

          Fro þe face of þe folde to fly3e ful hy3e;
        

          Wroþe wynde of þe welkyn wrastele3 with þe sunne,
        
The leaves drop off the trees,

          Þe leue3 lancen fro þe lynde, & ly3ten on þe grounde,
        
the grass becomes gray, and all ripens and rots.

          & al grayes þe gres, þat grene wat3 ere;
        
528

          Þenne al rype3 & rote3 þat ros vpon fyrst,
        

          & þus 3irne3 þe 3ere in 3isterdaye3 mony,
        
Winter winds round again,

          & wynter wynde3 a3ayn, as þe worlde aske3
        

          no sage.
        
532

          Til me3el-mas mone,
        

          Wat3 cumen wyth wynter wage;
        
and then Sir Gawayne thinks of his dread journey.

          Þen þenkke3 Gawan ful sone,
        

          Of his anious uyage.
        



      III.
    


On All-hallows day Arthur makes a feast for his
        nephew's sake. 536

          3et quyl al-hal-day with Arþer he lenges,
        

          & he made a fare on þat fest, for þe freke3 sake,
        

          With much reuel & ryche of þe rounde table;
        

          Kny3te3 ful cortays & comlych ladies,
        
540

          Al for luf of þat lede in longynge þay were,
        

          Bot neuer-þe-lece ne þe later þay neuened bot merþe,
        

          Mony ioyle3 for þat ientyle iape3 þer maden.
        
After meat, Sir Gawayne thus speaks to his uncle:

          For aftter mete, with mournyng he mele3 to
          his eme,
        
544

          & speke3 of his passage, & pertly he sayde,
        
"Now, liege lord, I ask leave of you,

          "Now, lege lorde of my lyf, leue I yow ask;
        

          3e knowe þe cost of þis cace, kepe I no more
        

          To telle yow tene3 þer-of neuer bot trifel;
        
for I am bound on the morn to seek the Green
        Knight." 548

          Bot I am boun to þe bur barely to morne,
        

          To sech þe gome of þe grene, as god wyl me wysse."
        

          Þenne þe best of þe bur3 bo3ed to-geder,
        

          Aywan, & Errik, & oþer ful mony,
        
[Fol. 98b.] 552

          Sir Doddinaual de Sauage, þe duk of Clarence,
        

          Launcelot, & Lyonel, & Lucan þe gode,
        

          Sir Boos, & sir Byduer, big men boþe,
        
Many nobles, the best of the court, counsel and
        comfort him.

          & mony oþer menskful, with Mador de la Port.
        
556

          Alle þis compayny of court com þe kyng nerre,
        

          For to counseyl þe kny3t, with care at her hert;
        
Much sorrow prevails in the hall.

          Þere wat3 much derue1 doel driuen in þe sale,
        

          Þat so worthe as Wawan schulde wende on þat ernde,
        
560

          To dry3e a delful dynt, & dele no more
        

          wyth bronde.
        

          Þe kny3t mad ay god chere,
        

          & sayde, "quat schuld I wonde,
        
Gawayne declares that he has nothing to fear.
564

          Of destines derf & dere,
        

          What may mon do bot fonde?"
        


1 derne (?).
      


      IV.
    


On the morn he asks for his arms.

          He dowelle3 þer al þat day, and dresse3 on þe morn,
        

          Aske3 erly hys arme3, & alle were þay bro3t
        
A carpet is spread on the floor, 568

          Fyrst a tule tapit, ty3t ouer þe flet,
        

          & miche wat3 þe gyld gere þat glent þer alofte;
        
and he steps thereon.

          Þe stif mon steppe3 þeron, & þe stel hondole3,
        
He is dubbed in a doublet of Tarsic silk, and a
        well-made hood.

          Dubbed in a dublet of a dere tars,
        
572

          & syþen a crafty capados, closed aloft,
        

          Þat wyth a bry3t blaunner was bounden with-inne;
        
They set steel slices on his feet, and lap his
        legs in steel greaves.

          Þenne set þay þe sabatoun3 vpon þe segge fote3,
        

          His lege3 lapped in stel with luflych greue3,
        
576

          With polayne3 piched þer-to, policed ful clene,
        

          Aboute his kne3 knaged wyth knote3 of golde;
        
Fair cuisses enclose his thighs,

          Queme quyssewes þen, þat coyntlych closed
        

          His thik þrawen þy3e3 with þwonges to-tachched;
        
and afterwards they put on the steel habergeon,
580

          & syþen þe brawden bryne of bry3t stel rynge3,
        

          Vmbe-weued þat wy3, vpon wlonk stuffe;
        
well-burnished braces, elbow pieces, and gloves
        of plate.

          & wel bornyst brace vpon his boþe armes,
        

          With gode cowters & gay, & gloue3 of plate,
        
584

          & alle þe godlych gere þat hym gayn schulde
        

          Þat tyde;
        
Over all this is placed the coat armour.

          Wyth ryche cote armure,
        
His spurs are then fixed,

          His gold spore3 spend with pryde,
        
and his sword is attached to his side by a silken
        girdle. 588

          Gurde wyth a bront ful sure,
        

          With silk sayn vmbe his syde.
        



      V.
    


[Fol. 99a.]Thus arrayed the knight
        hears mass,

          When he wat3 hasped in armes, his harnays wat3 ryche,
        

          Þe lest lachet ou[þ]er loupe lemed of golde;
        
592

          So harnayst as he wat3 he herkne3 his masse,
        

          Offred & honoured at þe he3e auter;
        
and afterwards takes leave of Arthur and his
        court.

          Syþen he come3 to þe kyng & to his cort fere3,
        

          Lache3 lufly his leue at lorde3 & ladye3;
        
596

          & þay hym kyst & conueyed, bikende hym to kryst.
        
By that time his horse Gringolet was ready,

          Bi þat wat3 Gryngolet grayth, & gurde with a sadel,
        

          Þat glemed ful gayly with mony golde frenges,
        

          Ay quere naylet ful nwe for þat note ryched;
        
600

          Þe brydel barred aboute, with bry3t golde bounden;
        
the harness of which glittered like the "gleam of
        the sun."

          Þe apparayl of þe payttrure, & of þe proude skyrte3,
        

          Þe cropore, & þe couertor, acorded wyth þe arsoune3;
        

          & al wat3 rayled on red ryche golde nayle3,
        
604

          Þat al glytered & glent as glem of þe sunne.
        
Then Sir Gawayne sets his helmet upon his head,

          Þenne hentes he þe holme, & hastily hit kysses,
        

          Þat wat3 stapled stifly, & stoffed wyth-inne:
        

          Hit wat3 hy3e on his hede, hasped bihynde,
        
fastened behind with a "urisoun," 608

          Wyth a ly3tli vrysoun ouer þe auentayle,
        
richly embroidered with gems.

          Enbrawden & bounden wyth þe best gemme3,
        

          On brode sylkyn borde, & brydde3 on seme3,
        

          As papiaye3 paynted pernyng bitwene,
        
612

          Tortors & trulofe3 entayled so þyk,
        

          As mony burde þer aboute had ben seuen wynter


          in toune;
        
The circle around the helmet was decked with
        diamonds.

          Þe cercle wat3 more o prys,
        
616

          Þat vmbe-clypped hys croun,
        

          Of diamaunte3 a deuys,
        

          Þat boþe were bry3t & broun.
        



      VI.
    


Then they show him his shield with the
        "pentangle" of pure gold.

          Then þay schewed hym þe schelde, þat was of schyr goule3,
        
620

          Wyth þe pentangel de-paynt of pure golde hwe3;
        

          He brayde3 hit by þe baude-ryk, aboute þe hals kestes,
        

          Þat bisemed þe segge semlyly fayre.
        
The "pentangle" was devised by Solomon as a token
        of truth.

          & quy þe pentangel apende3 to þat prynce noble,
        
624

          I am in tent yow to telle, þof tary hyt me schulde;
        

          Hit is a syngne þat Salamon set sum-quyle,
        

          In bytoknyng of trawþe, bi tytle þat hit habbe3,
        
[Fol. 99b]

          For hit is a figure þat halde3 fyue poynte3,
        
628

          & vche lyne vmbe-lappe3 & louke3 in oþer,
        
It is called the endless knot

          & ay quere hit is endele3,1 & Englych hit callen
        

          Ouer-al, as I here, þe endeles knot.
        

          For-þy hit acorde3 to þis kny3t, & to his cler arme3,
        
632

          For ay faythful in fyue & sere fyue syþe3,
        
It well becomes the good Sir Gawayne,

          Gawan wat3 for gode knawen, & as golde pured,
        

          Voyded of vche vylany, wyth vertue32 ennourned
        

          in mote;
        
636

          For-þy þe pen-tangel nwe
        

          He ber in schelde & cote,
        
a knight the truest of speech and the fairest of
        form.

          As tulk of tale most trwe,
        

          & gentylest kny3t of lote.
        


1 MS emdele3. 2 MS verertue3
      


      VII.
    


He was found faultless in his five wits.
640

          Fyrst he wat3 funden fautle3 in his fyue wytte3,
        

          & efte fayled neuer þe freke in his fyue fyngres,
        
His trust was in the five wounds.

          & alle his afyaunce vpon folde wat3 in þe fyue wounde3
        

          Þat Cryst ka3t on þe croys, as þe crede telle3;
        
644

          & quere-so-euer þys mon in melly wat3 stad,
        

          His þro þo3t wat3 in þat, þur3 alle oþer þynge3,
        

          Þat alle his forsnes he fong at þe fyue ioye3,
        

          Þat þe hende heuen quene had of hir chylde;
        
648

          At þis cause þe kny3t comlyche hade
        
The image of the Virgin was depicted upon his
        shield.

          In þe more half of his schelde hir ymage depaynted,
        

          Þat quen he blusched þerto, his belde neuer payred.
        

          Þe fyrst1 fyue þat I finde þat þe frek vsed,
        
652

          Wat3 fraunchyse, & fela3schyp for-be2 al þyng;
        
In cleanness and courtesy he was never found
        wanting,

          His clannes & his cortaysye croked were neuer,
        

          & pite, þat passe3 alle poynte3, þyse pure fyue
        

          Were harder happed on þat haþel þen on any oþer.
        
656

          Now alle þese fyue syþe3, forsoþe, were fetled on þis kny3t,
        

          & vchone halched in oþer, þat non ende hade,
        

          & fyched vpon fyue poynte3, þat fayld neuer,
        

          Ne samned neuer in no syde, ne sundred nouþ[er],
        
660

          With-outen ende at any noke [a]i quere fynde,
        

          Where-euer þe gomen bygan, or glod to an ende.
        
therefore was the endless knot fastened on his
        shield.

          Þer-fore on his schene schelde schapen wat3 þe knot,
        

          Þus alle wyth red golde vpon rede gowle3,
        
[Fol. 100] 664

          Þat is þe pure pentaungel wyth þe peple called,
        

          with lore.
        

          Now grayþed is Gawan gay,
        
Sir Gawayne seizes his lance and bids all "good
        day."

          & la3t his launce ry3t þore,
        
668

          & gef hem alle goud day,
        

          He wende for euer more.
        


1 MS fyft. 2 for-bi (?).
      


      VIII.
    


He spurs his horse and goes on his way.

          He sperred þe sted with þe spure3, & sprong on his
          way,
        

          So stif þat þe ston fyr stroke out þer-after;
        
All that saw that seemly one mourned in their
        hearts. 672

          Al þat se3 þat semly syked in hert,
        

          & sayde soþly al same segges til oþer,
        

          Carande for þat comly, "bi Kryst, hit is scaþe,
        

          Þat þou, leude, schal be lost, þat art of lyf noble!
        
They declared that his equal was not to be found
        upon earth. 676

          To fynde hys fere vpon folde, in fayth is not eþe;
        

          Warloker to haf wro3t had more wyt bene,
        

          & haf dy3t 3onder dere a duk to haue worþed;
        
It would have been better for him to have been a
        leader of men,

          A lowande leder of lede3 in londe hym wel seme3,
        
680

          & so had better haf ben þen britned to no3t,
        
than to die by the hands of "an elvish man."

          Hadet wyth an aluisch mon, for angarde3 pryde.
        

          Who knew euer any kyng such counsel to take,
        

          As kny3te3 in caueloun3 on cryst-masse gomne3!"
        
Much was the warm water that poured from eyes
        that day. 684

          Wel much wat3 þe warme water þat waltered of y3en,
        

          When þat semly syre so3t fro þo wone3
        

          þat1 daye;
        

          He made non abode,
        
688

          Bot wy3tly went hys way,
        
Meanwhile many a weary way goes Sir Gawayne.

          Mony wylsum way he rode,
        

          Þe bok as I herde say.
        


1 MS. þad.
      


      IX.
    


Now rides the knight through the realms of
        England.

          Now ride3 þis renk þur3 þe ryalme of Logres,
        
692

          Sir Gauan on Gode3 halue, þa3 hym no gomen þo3t;
        

          Oft, leudle3 alone, he lenge3 on ny3te3,
        

          Þer he fonde no3t hym byfore þe fare þat he lyked;
        
He has no companion but his horse.

          Hade he no fere bot his fole, bi frythe3 & doune3,
        
696

          Ne no gome bot God, bi gate wyth to karp,
        
No men does he see till he approaches North
        Wales.

          Til þat he ne3ed ful noghe1 in to þe Norþe
          Wale3;
        

          Alle þe iles of Anglesay on lyft half he halde3,
        

          & fare3 ouer þe forde3 by þe for-londe3,
        
From Holyhead he passes into Wirral. 700

          Ouer at þe Holy-Hede, til he hade eft bonk
        

          In þe wyldrenesse of Wyrale; wonde þer bot lyte
        
[Fol. 100b]There he finds but few
        that loved God or man.

          Þat auþer God oþer gome wyth goud hert louied.
        

          & ay he frayned, as he ferde, at freke3 þat he met,
        
He enquires after the Green Knight of the Green
        Chapel, 704

          If þay hade herde any karp of a kny3t grene,
        

          In any grounde þer-aboute, of þe grene chapel;2


          & al nykked hym wyth nay, þat neuer in her
          lyue
        
but can gain no tidings of him.

          Þay se3e neuer no segge þat wat3 of suche hwe3
        
708

          of grene.
        

          Þe kny3t tok gates straunge,
        

          In mony a bonk vnbene,
        
His cheer oft changed before he found the Chapel.

          His cher ful oft con chaunge,
        
712

          Þat chapel er he my3t sene.
        


1 nyghe (?). 2 MS. clapel.
      


      X.
    


Many a cliff he climbed over;

          Mony klyf he ouer-clambe in contraye3 straunge,
        

          Fer floten fro his frende3 fremedly he ryde3;
        
many a ford and stream he crossed, and everywhere
        he found a foe.

          At vche warþe oþer water þer þe wy3e passed,
        
716

          He fonde a foo hym byfore, bot ferly hit were,
        

          & þat so foule & so felle, þat fe3t hym by-hode;
        
It were too tedious to tell the tenth part of his
        adventures

          So mony meruayl hi mount þer þe mon fynde3,
        

          Hit were to tore for to telle of þe tenþe dole.
        
with serpents, wolves, and wild men; 720

          Sumwhyle wyth worme3 he werre3, & with wolues als,
        

          Sumwhyle wyth wodwos, þat woned in þe knarre3,
        
with bulls, bears, and boars.

          Boþe wyth bulle3 & bere3, & bore3 oþer-quyle,
        

          & etayne3, þat hym a-nelede, of þe he3e felle;
        
Had he not been both brave and good, doubtless he
        had been dead. 724

          Nade he ben du3ty & dry3e, & dry3tyn had serued,
        

          Douteles he hade ben ded, & dreped ful ofte.
        
The sharp winter was far worse than any war that
        ever troubled him.

          For werre wrathed hym not so much, þat wynter was
          wors,
        

          When þe colde cler water fro þe cloude3 schadden,
        
728

          & fres er hit falle my3t to þe fale erþe;
        

          Ner slayn wyth þe slete he sleped in his yrnes,
        

          Mo ny3te3 þen in-noghe in naked rokke3,
        

          Þer as claterande fro þe crest þe colde borne renne3,
        
732

          & henged he3e ouer his hede in hard ÿsse-ikkles.
        
Thus in peril he travels till Christmas-eve.

          Þus in peryl, & payne, & plytes ful harde,
        

          Bi contray carye3 þis kny3t, tyl kryst-masse euen,
        

          al one;
        
736

          Þe kny3t wel þat tyde,
        
To the Virgin Mary he prays to guide him to some
        abode.

          To Mary made his mone.
        

          Þat ho hym red to ryde,
        
[Fol. 101.]

          & wysse hym to sum wone.
        



      XI.
    


On the morn Sir Gawayne finds himself in a deep
        forest, 740

          Bi a mounte on þe morne meryly he rydes,
        

          Into a forest ful dep, þat ferly wat3 wylde,
        

          Hi3e hille3 on vche a halue, & holt wode3 vnder,
        
where were old oaks many a hundred.

          Of hore oke3 fill hoge a hundreth to-geder;
        
744

          Þe hasel & þe ha3-þorne were harled al samen,
        

          With ro3e raged mosse rayled ay-where,
        
Many sad birds upon bare twigs piped piteously
        for the cold.

          With mony brydde3 vnblyþe vpon bare twyges,
        

          Þat pitosly þer piped for pyne of þe colde.
        
748

          Þe gome vpon Gryngolet glyde3 hem vnder,
        
Through many a mire he goes, that he may
        celebrate the birth of Christ.

          Þur3 mony misy & myre, mon al hym one,
        

          Carande for his costes, lest he ne keuer schulde,
        

          To se þe seruy1 of þat syre, þat on þat self ny3t
        
752

          Of a burde wat3 borne, oure baret to quelle;
        
He beseeches the Virgin Mary to direct him to
        some lodging where he may hear mass.

          & þerfore sykyng he sayde, "I be-seche þe, lorde,
        

          & Mary, þat is myldest moder so dere.
        

          Of sum herber, þer he3ly I my3t here masse.
        
756

          Ande þy matyne3 to-morne, mekely I ask,
        

          & þer-to prestly I pray my pater & aue,
        

          & crede."
        

          He rode in his prayere,
        
760

          & cryed for his mysdede,
        
Blessing himself, he says, "Cross of Christ,
        speed me!"

          He sayned hym in syþes sere,
        

          & sayde "cros Kryst me spede!"
        


1 seruyce (?).
      


      XII.
    


Scarcely had he blessed himself thrice

          Nade he sayned hym-self, segge, bot þrye,
        
764

          Er he wat3 war in þe wod of a won in a mote.
        
when he saw a dwelling in the wood, set on a
        hill,

          Abof a launde, on a lawe, loken vnder bo3e3,
        

          Of mony borelych bole, aboute bi þe diches;
        
the comeliest castle that knight ever owned.

          A castel þe comlokest þat euer kny3t a3te,
        
768

          Pyched on a prayere, a park al aboute,
        

          With a pyked palays, pyned ful þik,
        

          Þat vmbe-te3e mony tre mo þen two myle.
        

          Þat holde on þat on syde þe haþel auysed,
        
It shone as the sun through the bright oaks.
772

          As hit schemered & schon þur3 þe schyre oke3;
        

          Þenne hat3 he hendly of his helme, & he3ly he þonke3
        

          Iesus & say[nt] Gilyan, þat gentyle ar boþe,
        
[Fol. 101b.]

          Þat cortaysly hade hym kydde, & his cry herkened.
        
776

          "Now bone hostel," coþe þe burne, "I be-seche yow 3ette!"
        

          Þenne gedere3 he to Gryngolet with þe gilt hele3,
        
Sir Gawayne goes to the chief gate,

          & he ful chauncely hat3 chosen to þe chef gate,
        

          Þat bro3t bremly þe burne to þe bryge ende,
        
780

          in haste;
        
and finds the draw-bridge raised, and the gates
        shut fast.

          Þe bryge wat3 breme vp-brayde,
        

          Þe 3ate3 wer stoken faste,
        

          Þe walle3 were wel arayed,
        
784

          Hit dut no wynde3 blaste.
        



      XIII.
    


The knight abides on the bank,

          Þe burne bode on bonk, þat on blonk houed,
        

          Of þe depe double dich þat drof to þe place,
        

          Þe walle wod in þe water wonderly depe,
        
and observes the "huge height," 788

          Ande eft a ful huge he3t hit haled vpon lofte,
        

          Of harde hewen ston vp to þe table3,
        
with its battlements and watch towers.

          Enbaned vnder þe abataylment, in þe best lawe;
        

          & syþen garyte3 ful gaye gered bi-twene,
        
792

          Wyth mony luflych loupe, þat louked ful clene;
        

          A better barbican þat burne blusched vpon neuer;
        

          & innermore he be-helde þat halle ful hy3e,
        
Bright and long were its round towers,

          Towre telded bytwene trochet ful þik,
        
796

          Fayre fylyole3 þat fy3ed, & ferlyly long,
        
with their well-made capitals.

          With coruon coprounes, craftyly sle3e;
        

          Chalk whyt chymnees þer ches he in-no3e,
        

          Vpon bastel roue3, þat blenked ful quyte;
        
800

          So mony pynakle payntet wat3 poudred ay quere,
        

          Among þe castel carnele3, clambred so þik,
        

          Þat pared out of papure purely hit semed.
        
He thinks it fair enough if he might only come
        within the cloister.

          Þe fre freke on þe fole hit fayr in-n[o]ghe þo3t,
        
804

          If he my3t keuer to com þe cloyster wyth-inne,
        

          To herber in þat hostel, whyl halyday lested
        

          auinant;
        
He calls, and soon there comes a porter to know
        the knight's errand.

          He calde, & sone þer com
        
808

          A porter pure plesaunt,
        

          On þe wal his ernd he nome,
        

          & haylsed þe kny3t erraunt.
        



      XIV.
    


"Good sir," says Gawayne, "ask the high lord of
        this house to grant me a lodging."

          "Gode sir," quod Gawan, "wolde3 þou go myn
          ernde,
        
812

          To þe he3 lorde of þis hous, herber to craue?"
        
[Fol. 102.]

          "3e, Peter," quod þe porter, "& purely I
          trowe,1

"You are welcome to dwell here as long as you
        like," replied the porter.

          Þat 3e be, wy3e, welcum to won quyle yow lyke3."
        

          Þen 3ede þat wy3e a3ayn awyþe,
        
816

          & folke frely hym wyth, to fonge þe kny3t;
        
The draw-bridge is let down,

          Þay let doun þe grete dra3t, & derely out 3eden,
        

          & kneled doun on her knes vpon þe colde erþe,
        

          To welcum þis ilk wy3, as worþy hom þo3t;
        
and the gate is opened wide to receive him.
820

          Þay 3olden hym þe brode 3ate, 3arked vp wyde,
        

          & he hem raysed rekenly, & rod ouer þe brygge;
        

          Sere segge3 hym sesed by sadel, quel2 he ly3t,
        
His horse is well stabled.

          & syþen stabeled his stede stif men in-no3e.
        
Knights and squires bring Gawayne into the hall.
824

          Kny3te3 & swyere3 comen doun þenne,
        

          For to bryng þis burne3 wyth blys in-to
          halle;
        
Many a one hastens to take his helmet and sword.

          Quen he hef vp his helme, þer hi3ed in-noghe


          For to hent hit at his honde, þe hende to seruen,
        
828

          His bronde & his blasoun boþe þay token.
        

          Þen haylsed he ful hendly þo haþele3 vch one,
        

          & mony proud mon þer presed, þat prynce to honour;
        

          Alle hasped in his he3 wede to halle þay hym wonnen,
        
832

          Þer fayre fyre vpon flet fersly brenned.
        
The lord of the country bids him welcome,

          Þenne þe lorde of þe lede loute3 fro his chambre,
        

          For to mete wyth menske þe mon on þe flor;
        

          He sayde, "3e ar welcum to welde as yow lyke3,
        
836

          Þat here is, al is yowre awen, to haue at yowre wylle
        

          & welde."
        

          "Graunt mercy," quod Gawayn,
        

          "Þer Kryst hit yow for-3elde,"
        
and they embrace each other. 840

          As freke3 þat semed fayn,
        

          Ayþer oþer in arme3 con felde.
        


1 trowoe, MS. 2 quyle (?) or quen (?). 3
        buurne, MS.
      


      XV.
    


Gawayne looks on his host;

          Gawayn gly3t on þe gome þat godly hym gret,
        
a big bold one he seemed.

          & þu3t hit a bolde burne þat þe bur3 a3te,
        
844

          A hoge haþel for þe none3, & of hyghe elde;1

Beaver-hued was his broad beard,

          Brode bry3t wat3 his berde, & al beuer hwed,
        

          Sturne stif on þe stryþþe on stal-worth schonke3,
        
and his face as "fell as the fire."

          Felle face as þe fyre, & fre of hys speche;
        
848

          & wel hym semed for soþe, as þe segge þu3t,
        

          To lede a lortschyp in lee of leude3 ful gode.
        
[Fol. 102b.]The lord leads Gawayne to
        a chamber, and assigns him a page to wait upon him.

          Þe lorde hym charred to a chambre, & chefly cumaunde32


          To delyuer hym a leude, hym lo3ly to serue;
        
852

          & þere were boun at his bode burne3 in-no3e,
        
In this bright bower was noble bedding;

          Þat bro3t hym to a bry3t boure, þer beddyng wat3
          noble,
        

          Of cortynes of clene sylk, wyth cler golde hemme3,
        
the curtains were of pure silk with golden hems;

          & couertore3 ful curious, with comlych pane3,
        
856

          Of bry3t blaunnier a-boue enbrawded bisyde3,
        

          Rudele3 rennande on rope3, red golde rynge3,
        
Tarsic tapestries covered the walls and the
        floor.

          Tapyte3 ty3t to þe wo3e, of tuly & tars,
        

          & vnder fete, on þe flet, of fol3ande sute.
        
Here the knight doffed his armour, 860

          Þer he wat3 dispoyled, wyth speche3 of myerþe,
        

          Þe burn of his bruny, & of his bry3t wede3;
        
and put on rich robes,

          Ryche robes ful rad renkke3 hem3 bro3ten,
        

          For to charge, & to chaunge, & chose of þe best.
        
864

          Sone as he on hent, & happed þer-inne,
        

          Þat sete on hym4 semly, wyth saylande skyrte3,
        
which well became him.

          Þe ver by his uisage verayly hit semed
        

          Wel ne3 to vche haþel alle on hwes,
        
868

          Lowande & lufly, alle his lymme3 vnder,
        
A more comely knight Christ never made.

          Þat a comloker kny3t neuer Kryst made,
        

          hem þo3t;
        

          Wheþen in worlde he were,
        
872

          Hit semed as he my3t
        

          Be prynce with-outen pere,
        

          In felde þer felle men fy3t.
        


1 eldee, MS. 2 clesly, MS. 3 hym (?).
        4 MS. hyn.
      


      XVI.
    


A chair is placed for Sir Gawayne before the
        fireplace.

          A cheyer by-fore þe chemné, þer charcole brenned,
        
876

          Wat3 grayþed for sir Gawan, grayþely with cloþe3,
        

          Whyssynes vpon queldepoyntes, þa[t] koynt wer boþe;
        
A mantle of fine linen, richly embroidered, is
        thrown over him.

          & þenne a mere mantyle wat3 on þat mon cast,
        

          Of a broun bleeaunt, enbrauded ful ryche,
        
880

          & fayre furred wyth-inne with felle3 of þe
          best,
        

          Alle of ermyn in erde, his hode of þe same;
        

          & he sete in þat settel semlych ryche,
        

          & achaufed hym chefly,1 & þenne his
          cher mended.
        
A table is soon raised, 884

          Sone wat3 telded vp a tapit, on treste3 ful fayre,
        
and the knight, having washed, proceeded to meat.

          Clad wyth a clene cloþe, þat cler quyt schewed,
        

          Sanap, & salure, & syluer-in spone3;
        
[Fol. 103.]

          Þe wy3e wesche at his wylle, & went to his mete
        
888

          Segge3 hym serued semly in-no3e,
        
He is served with numerous dishes;

          Wyth sere sewes & sete,2 sesounde of þe best,
        

          Double felde, as hit falle3, & fele kyn fische3;
        
with fish baked and broiled,

          Summe baken in bred, summe brad on þe glede3,
        
or boiled and seasoned with spices. 892

          Summe soþen, summe in sewe, sauered with
          spyces,
        

          & ay sawes3 so sle3e3, þat þe segge lyked.
        

          Þe freke calde hit a fest ful frely & ofte,
        
He calls it a full noble feast,

          Ful hendely, quen alle þe haþeles re-hayted hym at one3
        
896

          as hende;
        

          "Þis penaunce now 3e take,
        

          & eft hit schal amende;"
        
and much mirth he makes, for the wine is in his
        head.

          Þat mon much merþe con make.
        
900

          For wyn in his hed þat wende.
        


1 MS. cefly. 2 swete (?). 3 sewes (?).
      


      XVII.
    


Sir Gawayne, in answer to questions put to him,

          Þenne wat3 spyed & spured vpon spare wyse.
        

          Bi preue poynte3 of þat prynce, put to hym-seluen,
        

          Þat he be-knew cortaysly of þe court þat he were,
        
tells the prince that he is of Arthur's court.
904

          Þat aþel Arthure þe hende halde3 hym one,
        

          Þat is þe ryche ryal kyng of þe rounde table;
        

          & hit wat3 Wawen hym-self þat in þat won sytte3,
        

          Comen to þat krystmasse, as case hym þen lymped.
        
When this was made known, 908

          When þe lorde hade lerned þat he þe leude hade,
        

          Loude la3ed he þerat, so lef hit hym þo3t,
        
great was the joy in the hall.

          & alle þe men in þat mote maden much joye,
        

          To apere in his presense prestly þat tyme,
        
912

          Þat alle prys, & prowes, & pured þewes
        

          Apendes to hys persoun, & praysed is euer,
        

          By-fore alle men vpon molde, his mensk is þe most.
        
Each one said softly to his mate,

          Vch segge ful softly sayde to his fere,
        
"Now we shall see courteous manners and hear
        noble speech, 916

          "Now schal we semlych se sle3te3 of þewe3,
        

          & þe teccheles termes of talkyng noble,
        

          Wich spede is in speche, vnspurd may we lerne,
        
for we have amongst us the 'father of nurture.'

          Syn we haf fonged þat fyne fader of nurture;
        
920

          God hat3 geuen vus his grace godly for soþe,
        

          Þat such a gest as Gawan graunte3 vus to haue,
        

          When burne3 blyþe of his burþe schal sitte
        

          & synge.
        
924

          In menyng of manere3 mere,
        
[Fol. 103b.]

          Þis burne now schal vus bryng,
        
He that may him hear shall learn of
        love-talking."

          I hope þat may hym here,
        

          Schal lerne of luf-talkyng."
        



      XVIII.
    


After dinner the company go to the chapel,
928

          Bi þat þe diner wat3 done, & þe dere vp,
        

          Hit wat3 ne3 at þe niy3t ne3ed þe tyme;
        

          Chaplayne31 to þe chapeles chosen þe gate,
        

          Rungen ful rychely, ry3t as þay schulden,
        
to hear the evensong of the great season.
932

          To þe hersum euensong of þe hy3e tyde.
        

          Þe lorde loutes þerto, & þe lady als,
        

          In-to a comly closet coyntly ho entre3;
        

          Gawan glyde3 ful gay, & gos þeder sone;
        
936

          Þe lorde laches hym by þe lappe, & lede3 hym to
          sytte,
        

          & couþly hym knowe3, & calle3 hym his nome,
        

          & sayde he wat3 þe welcomest wy3e of þe worlde;
        
The lord of the castle and Sir Gawayne sit
        together during service.

          & he hym þonkked þroly, & ayþer halched oþer.
        
940

          & seten soberly samen þe seruise-quyle;
        

          Þenne lyst þe lady to loke on þe kny3t.
        
His wife, accompanied by her maids, leaves her
        seat.

          Þenne com ho of hir closet, with mony cler
          burde3,
        

          Ho wat3 þe fayrest in felle, of flesche & of lyre,
        
944

          & of compas, & colour, & costes of alle oþer,
        
She appeared even fairer than Guenever.

          & wener þen Wenore, as þe wy3e þo3t.
        

          He ches þur3 þe chaunsel, to cheryche þat hende;
        
An older lady (an ancient one she seemed) led her
        by the hand.

          An oþer lady hir lad bi þe lyft honde,
        
948

          Þat wat3 alder þen ho, an auncian hit semed,
        

          & he3ly honowred with haþele3 aboute.
        
Very unlike were these two.

          Bot yn-lyke on to loke þo ladyes were,
        
if the young one was fair the other was yellow,

          For if þe 3onge wat3 3ep, 3ol3e wat3 þat oþer;
        
952

          Riche red on þat on rayled ay quere,
        
and had rough and wrinkled cheeks.

          Rugh ronkled cheke3 þat oþer on rolled;
        

          Kerchofes of þat on wyth mony cler perle3
        
The younger had breast and throat "bare
        displayed."

          Hir brest & hir bry3t þrote bare displayed,
        
956

          Schon schyrer þen snawe, þat scheder2 on hille3;
        

          Þat oþer wyth a gorger wat3 gered ouer þe swyre,
        

          Chymbled ouer hir blake chyn with mylk-quyte
          vayles,
        
The ancient one exposed only her "black brows,"
        her two eyes,

          Hir frount folden in sylk, enfoubled ay quere,
        
960

          Toret & treieted with tryfle3 aboute,
        
[Fol. 104.]nose, and naked lips, all sour
        and bleared.

          Þat no3t wat3 bare of þat burde bot þe blake bro3es.
        

          Þe tweyne y3en, & þe nase, þe naked lyppe3,
        

          & þose were soure to se, & sellyly blered;
        
964

          A mensk lady on molde mon may hir calle,
        

          for gode;
        
Her body was short and thick;

          Hir body wat3 schort & þik.
        
her buttocks broad and round.

          Hir buttoke3 bay & brode,
        
968

          More lykker-wys on to lyk,
        

          Wat3 þat scho hade on lode.
        


1 MS. [claplayne3.] 2 schedes (?).
      


      XIX.
    


With permission of the lord,

          When Gawayn gly3t on þat gay, þat graciously
          loked,
        

          Wyth leue la3t of þe lorde he went hem a3aynes;
        
Sir Gawayne salutes the elder, 972

          Þe alder he haylses, heldande ful lowe,
        

          Þe loueloker he lappe3 a lyttel in arme3,
        
but the younger he kisses,

          He kysses hir comlyly, & kny3tly he mele3;
        

          Þay kallen hym of a quoyntaunce, & he hit
          quyk aske3
        
and begs to be her servant. 976

          To be her seruaunt sothly, if hem-self lyked.
        

          Þay tan hym bytwene hem, wyth talkyng hym leden
        
To chamber all go,

          To chambre, to chemné, & chefly þay asken
        
where spices and wine are served.

          Spyce3, þat vn-sparely men speded hom to bryng,
        
980

          & þe wynne-lych wyne þer-with vche
          tyme.
        

          Þe lorde luflych aloft lepe3 ful ofte,
        

          Mynned merthe to be made vpon mony syþe3.
        
The lord takes off his hood and places it on a
        spear.

          Hent he3ly of his hode, & on a spere henged,
        
984

          & wayned hom to wynne þe worchip þer-of,
        
He who makes most mirth is to win it.

          Þat most myrþe my3t mene1 þat crystenmas whyle;
        

          "& i schal fonde, bi my fayth, to fylter wyth þe best,
        

          Er me wont þe wede3, with help of my frende3."
        
988

          Þus wyth la3ande lote3 þe lorde hit tayt2 make3,
        
Night approaches, and then

          For to glade sir Gawayn with gomne3 in
          halle
        

          þat ny3t;
        

          Til þat hit wat3 tyme,
        
992

          Þe kyng comaundet ly3t,
        
Sir Gawayne takes his leave and retires to rest.

          Sir Gawen his leue con nyme,
        

          & to his bed hym di3t.
        


1 meue (?). 2 layt (?).
      


      XX.
    


On Christmas morn,

          On þe morne, as vch mon myne3 þat tyme,
        
joy reigns in every dwelling in the world.
996

          [Þ]at dry3tyn for oure destyné to de3e wat3 borne,
        

          Wele waxe3 in vche a won in worlde, for his sake;
        
So did it in the castle where our knight abode.

          So did hit þere on þat day, þur3 dayntes mony;
        
[Fol. 104b.]

          Boþe at mes & at mele, messes ful quaynt
        
1000

          Derf men vpon dece drest of þe best.
        
The lord and "the old ancient wife" sit together.

          Þe olde auncian wyf he3est ho sytte3;
        

          Þe lorde lufly her by lent, as I trowe;
        
Gawayne sits by the wife of his host.

          Gawan & þe gay burde to-geder þay seten,
        
1004

          Euen in-mydde3, as þe messe metely come;
        

          & syþen þur3 al þe sale, as hem best semed,
        
It were too tedious to tell of the meat, the
        mirth, and the joy that abounded everywhere.

          Bi vche grome at his degre grayþely wat3 serued.
        

          Þer wat3 mete, þer wat3 myrþe, þer wat3 much ioye,
        
1008

          Þat for to telle þerof hit me tene were,
        

          & to poynte hit 3et I pyned me parauenture;
        
Gawayne and his beautiful companion derive much
        comfort from each other's conversation.

          Bot 3et I wot þat Wawen & þe wale burde
        

          Such comfort of her compaynye ca3ten to-geder,
        
1012

          Þur3 her dere dalyaunce of her derne worde3,
        

          Wyth clene cortays carp, closed fro fylþe;
        

          & hor play wat3 passande vche prynce gomen,
        

          in vayres;
        
Trumpets and nakers give forth their sounds.
1016

          Trumpe3 & nakerys,
        

          Much pypyng þer repayres,
        

          Vche mon tented hys,
        

          & þay two tented þayres.
        



      XXI.
    


Great was the joy for three days. 1020

          Much dut wat3 þer dryuen þat day & þat oþer,
        

          & þe þryd as þro þronge in þerafter;
        
St. John's-day was the last of the Christmas
        festival.

          Þe ioye of sayn Ione3 day wat3 gentyle to here,
        

          & wat3 þe last of þe layk, leude3 þer þo3ten.
        
1024

          Þer wer gestes to go vpon þe gray morne,
        

          For-þy wonderly þay woke, & þe wyn dronken,
        

          Daunsed ful dre3ly wyth dere carole3;
        
On the morrow many of the guests took their
        departure from the castle.

          At þe last, when hit wat3 late, þay lachen her leue,
        
1028

          Vchon to wende on his way, þat wat3 wy3e stronge.
        

          Gawan gef hym god-day, þe god mon hym lachche3,
        

          Ledes hym to his awen chambre, þ[e] chymné bysyde,
        
Sir Gawayne is thanked by his host for the honour
        and pleasure of his visit.

          & þere he dra3e3 hym on-dry3e, & derely hym
          þonkke3,
        
1032

          Of þe wynne worschip &1 he hym wayned
          hade,
        

          As to honour his hous on þat hy3e tyde,
        

          & enbelyse his bur3 with his bele chere.
        

          "I-wysse sir, quyl I leue, me worþe3 þe better,
        
[Fol. 105.] 1036

          Þat Gawayn hat3 ben my gest, at Godde3 awen fest."
        

          "Grant merci2 sir," quod Gawayn, "in
          god fayth hit is yowre3,
        

          Al þe honour is your awen, þe he3e kyng yow
          3elde;
        

          & I am wy3e at your wylle, to worch youre hest,
        
1040

          As I am halden þer-to, in hy3e & in lo3e,
        

          bi ri3t."
        
He endeavours to keep the knight at his court.

          Þe lorde fast can hym payne,
        

          To holde lenger þe kny3t,
        
1044

          To hym answre3 Gawayn,
        

          Bi non way þat he my3t.
        


1 þat (?). 2 nerci, in MS.
      


      XXII.
    


He desires to know what had driven Sir Gawayne
        from Arthur's court before the end of the Christmas holidays.

          Then frayned þe freke ful fayre at him-seluen,
        

          Quat derne1 dede had hym dryuen, at þat dere tyme,
        
1048

          So kenly fro þe kynge3 kourt to kayre al his one,
        

          Er þe halidaye3 holly were halet out of toun?
        
The knight replies that "a high errand and a
        hasty one" had forced him to leave the court.

          "For soþe sir," quod þe segge, "3e sayn bot þe trawþe
        

          A he3e ernde & a hasty me hade fro þo wone3,
        
1052

          For I am sumned my selfe to sech to a place,
        

          I wot2 in worlde wheder warde to wende, hit to
          fynde;
        

          I nolde, bot if I hit negh my3t on nw3eres morne,
        

          For alle þe londe in-wyth Logres, so me oure lorde help!
        
1056

          For-þy, sir, þis enquest I require yow here,
        
He asks his host whether he has ever heard of the
        Green Chapel,

          Þat 3e me telle with trawþe, if euer 3e tale
          herde
        

          Of þe grene chapel, quere hit on grounde stonde3,
        

          & of þe kny3t þat hit kepes, of colour of grene?
        
1060

          Þer wat3 stabled bi statut a steuen vus by-twene,
        
for he has to be there on New Year's-day.

          To mete þat mon at þat mere, 3if I my3t last;
        

          & of þat ilk nw3ere hot neked now wonte3,
        

          & I wolde loke on þat lede, if God me let wolde,
        
1064

          Gladloker, bi Godde3 sun, þen any god welde!
        

          For-þi, I-wysse, bi 3owre wylle, wende me bi-houes,
        
He wonld as lief die as fail in his errand.

          Naf I now to busy bot bare þre daye3,
        

          & me als fayn to falle feye as fayly of myyn ernde."
        
The prince tells Sir Gawayne that he will teach
        him the way. 1068

          Þenne la3ande quod þe lorde, "now leng þe by-houes,
        

          For I schal teche yow to þa[t] terme bi þe tyme3 ende,
        

          Þe grene chapayle vpon grounde, greue yow no more;
        

          Bot 3e schal be in yowre bed, burne, at þyn ese,
        
1072

          Quyle forth dayej, & ferk on pe fyrst of pe 3ere,
        
[Fol. 105b]

          & cum to þat merk at mydmorn, to make quat yow like3
        

          in spenne;
        

          Dowelle3 whyle new 3eres daye,
        
1076

          & rys, & rayke3 þenne,
        
The Green chapel is not more than two miles from
        the castle.

          Mon schal yow sette in waye,
        

          Hit is not two myle henne."
        


1 derue (?). 2 not (?).
      


      XXIII.
    


Then was Gawayne glad,

          Þenne wat3 Gawan ful glad, & gomenly he la3ed,—
        
1080

          "Now I þonk yow þryuandely þur3 alle oþer þynge,
        
and consents to tarry awhile at the castle.

          Now acheued is my chaunce, I schal at your wylle
        

          Dowelle, & elle3 do quat 3e demen."
        

          Þenne sesed hym þe syre, & set hym bysyde,
        
The ladies are brought in to solace him.
1084

          Let þe ladie3 be fette, to lyke hem þe better;
        

          Þer wat3 seme solace by hem-self stille;
        

          Þe lorde let for luf lote3 so myry,
        

          As wy3 þat wolde of his wyte, ne wyst quat he my3t.
        
1088

          Þenne he carped to þe kny3t, criande loude,
        
The lord of the castle asks the knight to grant
        him one request;

          "3e han demed to do þe dede þat I bidde;
        

          Wyl 3e halde þis hes here at þys one3?"
        

          "3e sir, for-soþe," sayd þe segge trwe,
        
1092

          "Whyl I byde in yowre bor3e, be bayn to 3ow[r]e hest."
        

          "For 3e haf trauayled," quod þe tulk, "towen fro ferre,
        

          & syþen waked me wyth, 3e arn not wel waryst,
        
That he will stay in his chamber during mass
        time,

          Nauþer of sostnaunce ne of slepe, soþly I knowe;
        
1096

          3e schal lenge in your lofte, & ly3e in your
          ese,
        
and then go to meat with his hostess.

          To morn quyle þe messe-quyle, & to mete wende,
        

          When 3e wyl, wyth my wyf, þat wyth yow schal sitte,
        

          & comfort yow with compayny, til I to cort torne,
        
1100

          3e lende;
        

          & I schal erly ryse,
        

          On huntyng wyl I wende."
        
Gawayne accedes to his request.

          Gauayn grante3 alle þyse,
        
1104

          Hym heldande, as þe hende.
        



      XXIV.
    


"Whatsoever," says the host, "I win in the wood
        shall be yours,

          "3et firre," quod þe freke, "a forwarde we make;
        

          Quat-so-euer I wynne in þe wod, hit worþe3 to youre3,
        
and what check you achieve shall be mine."

          & quat chek so 3e acheue, chaunge me þer-forne;
        
1108

          Swete, swap we so, sware with trawþe,
        

          Queþer, leude, so lymp lere oþer better."
        

          "Bi God," quod Gawayn þe gode, "I grant þer-tylle,
        
[Fol. 106.]

          & þat yow lyst forto layke, lef hit me þynkes.
        
A bargain is made between them. 1112

          "Who bringe3 vus þis beuerage, þis bargayn is
          maked:"
        

          So sayde þe lorde of þat lede; þay la3ed vchone,
        

          Þay dronken, & daylyeden, & dalten vnty3tel,1


          Þise lorde3 & ladye3, quyle þat hem lyked;
        
1116

          & syþen with frenkysch fare & fele fayre lote3
        

          Þay stoden, & stemed, & stylly speken,
        

          Kysten ful comlyly, & ka3ten her leue.
        
Night approaches and each "to his bed was brought
        at the last."

          With mony leude ful ly3t, & lemande torches,
        
1120

          Vche burne to his bed wat3 bro3t at þe laste,
        

          ful softe;
        

          To bed 3et er þay 3ede,
        

          Recorded couenaunte3 ofte;
        
1124

          Þe olde lorde of þat leude,2


          Cowþe wel halde layk a-lofte.
        


1 vntyl ny3te (?). 2 lede (?).
      


      [FYTTE THE THIRD.]
    

      I.
    


Before day-break folks uprise,

          Ful erly bifore þe day þe folk vp-rysen,
        

          Gestes þat go wolde, hor grome3 þay calden,
        
saddle their horses, and truss their mails.
1128

          & þay busken vp bilyue, blonkke3 to sadel,
        

          Tyffen he[r] takles, trussen her males,
        

          Richen hem þe rychest, to ryde alle arayde,
        

          Lepen vp ly3tly, lachen her brydeles,
        
Each goes where it pleases him best. 1132

          Vche wy3e on his way, þer hym wel lyked.
        
The noble lord of the land arrays himself for
        riding.

          Þe leue lorde of þe londe wat3 not þe last,
        

          A-rayed for þe rydyng, with renkke3 ful mony;
        
He eats a sop hastily and goes to mass.

          Ete a sop hastyly, when he hade herde masse,
        
1136

          With bugle to bent felde he buske3 by-lyue;
        
Before day-light he and his men are on their
        horses.

          By þat þat any day-ly3t lemed vpon erþe,
        

          He with his haþeles on hy3e horsses weren.
        
Then the hounds are called out and coupled.

          Þenne þise cacheres þat couþe, cowpled hor hounde3,
        
1140

          Vnclosed þe kenel dore, & calde hem þer-oute,
        
Three short notes are blown by the bugles.

          Blwe bygly in bugle3 þre bare mote;
        

          Braches bayed þerfore, & breme noyse maked,
        
A hundred hunters join in the chase.

          & þay chastysed, & charred, on chasyng þat went;
        
1144

          A hundreth of hunteres, as I haf herde telle,
        

          of þe best;
        
To the stations the "fewters" go,

          To trystors vewters 3od,
        

          Couples huntes of kest,
        
[Fol. 106b.] 1148

          Þer ros for blaste3 gode,
        
and the dogs are cast off.

          Gret rurd in þat forest.
        



      II.
    


Roused by the clamour the deer rush to the
        heights,

          At þe fyrst quethe of þe quest quaked þe wylde;
        

          Der drof in þe dale, doted for drede,
        
1152

          Hi3ed to þe hy3e, bot heterly þay were
        
but are soon driven back.

          Restayed with þe stablye, þat stoutly ascryed;
        
The harts and bucks are allowed to pass,

          Þay let þe hertte3 haf þe gate, with þe hy3e hedes,
        

          Þe breme bukke3 also, with hor brode paume3;
        
1156

          For þe fre lorde hade de-fende in fermysoun tyme,
        

          Þat þer schulde no mon mene1 to þe male dere.
        
but the hinds and does are driven back to the
        shades.

          Þe hinde3 were halden in, with hay & war,
        

          Þe does dryuen with gret dyn to þe depe slade3;
        
1160

          Þer my3t mon se, as þay slypte, slentyng of arwes,
        
As they fly they are shot by the bowmen.

          At vche [þat] wende vnder wande wapped a flone,
        

          Þat bigly bote on þe broun, with ful brode hede3,
        
The hounds and the hunters, with a loud cry,
        follow in pursuit.

          What! þay brayen, & bleden, bi bonkke3 þay de3en.
        
1164

          & ay rachches in a res radly hem fol3es,
        

          Huntere3 wyth hy3e horne hasted hem after,
        
Those that escaped the arrows are killed by the
        hounds.

          Wyth such a crakkande kry, as klyffes haden brusten;
        

          What wylde so at-waped wy3es þat schotten,
        
1168

          Wat3 al to-raced & rent, at þe resayt.
        

          Bi þay were tened at þe hy3e, & taysed to þe wattre3,
        

          Þe lede3 were so lerned at þe lo3e trysteres,
        

          & þe gre-hounde3 so grete, þat geten hem bylyue,
        
1172

          & hem to fylched, as fast as freke3 my3t loke,
        

          þer ry3t.
        
The lord waxes joyful in the chase,

          Þe lorde for blys abloy
        

          Ful oft con launce & ly3t,
        
which lasted till the approach of night.
1176

          & drof þat day wyth Ioy
        

          Thus to þe derk ny3t.
        


1 meue (?).
      


      III.
    


All this time Gawayne lies a-bed.

          Þus layke3 þis lorde by lynde wode3 eue3,
        

          & G. þe god mon, in gay bed lyge3,
        
under "coverture full clear". 1180

          Lurkke3 quyl þe day-ly3t lemed on þe wowes,
        

          Vnder couertour ful clere, cortyned aboute;
        

          & as in slomeryng he slode, sle3ly he herde
        
He hears a noise at his door.

          A littel dyn at his dor, & derfly vpon;
        
1184

          & he heue3 vp his hed out of þe cloþes,
        
[Fol. 107.]

          A corner of þe cortyn he ca3t vp a lyttel,
        

          & wayte3 warly þider-warde, quat hit be my3t.
        
A lady, the loveliest to behold, enters softly.

          Hit wat3 þe ladi, loflyest to be-holde,
        
1188

          Þat dro3 þe dor after hir ful dernly1 & stylle,
        
She approaches the bed.

          & bo3ed to-warde þe bed; & þe burne schamed.
        

          & layde hym doun lystyly, & let as he slepte.
        
Gawayne pretends to be asleep.

          & ho stepped stilly. & stel to his bedde,
        
The lady casts up the curtain and sits on the
        bedside. 1192

          Kest vp þe cortyn, & creped with-inne,
        

          & set hir ful softly on þe bed-syde,
        

          & lenged þere selly longe, to loke quen he wakened.
        

          Þe lede lay lurked a ful longe quyle,
        
Gawayne has much wonder thereat. 1196

          Compast in his concience to quat þat cace my3t
        

          Mene oþer amount, to meruayle hym þo3t;
        

          Bot 3et he sayde in hym-self, "more semly hit were
        

          To aspye wyth my spelle [in] space quat ho wolde."
        
He rouses himself up, 1200

          þen he wakenede, & wroth, & to hir warde torned,
        
unlocks his eyes, and looks as if he were
        astonished.

          & vn-louked his y3e-lydde3, & let as hym wondered,
        

          & sayned hym, as bi his sa3e þe sauer to worthe,
        

          with hande;
        
1204

          Wyth chynne & cheke ful swete,
        

          Boþe quit & red in-blande,
        

          Ful lufly con ho lete,
        

          Wyth lyppe3 smal la3ande.
        


1 deruly (?).
      


      IV.
    


"Good morrow", says the lady, "ye are a careless
        sleeper to let one enter thus. 1208

          "God moroun, sir Gawayn," sayde þat fayr lady,
        

          "3e ar a sleper vn-sly3e, þat mon may slyde hider;
        

          Now ar 3e tan astyt, bot true vus may schape,
        
I shall bind you in your bed, of that be ye
        sure."

          I schal bynde yow in your bedde, þat be 3e trayst:"
        
1212

          Al la3ande þe lady lanced þo bourde3.
        
"Good morrow," says the knight, "I am well
        pleased to be at your service;

          "Goud moroun g[aye],"1 quod Gawayn þe blyþe,
        

          "Me schal worþe at your wille, & þat me wel lyke3,
        

          For I 3elde me 3ederly, & 3e3e after grace,
        
1216

          & þat is þe best, be my dome, for me by-houe3 nede;"
        

          & þus he bourded a-3ayn with mony a blyþe la3ter.
        
but permit me to rise and dress myself."

          "Bot wolde 3e, lady louely, þen leue me grante,
        

          & de-prece your prysoun, & pray hym to
          ryse,
        
1220

          I wolde bo3e of þis bed, & busk me better,
        

          I schulde keuer þe more comfort to karp yow wyth."
        
[Fol. 107b]"Nay, beau sir," said that sweet
        one,

          "Nay, for soþe, beau sir," sayd þat swete,
        

          "3e schal not rise of your bedde, I rych yow better,
        
"I shall hold talk with you here. 1224

          I schal happe yow here þat oþer half als,
        

          & syþen karp wyth my kny3t þat I ka3t haue;
        
I know well that you are Gawayne that all the
        woild worships.

          For I wene wel, Iwysse, sir Wawen 3e are,
        

          Þat alle þe worlde worchipe3, quere-so 3e ride;
        
1228

          Your honour, your hendelayk is hendely praysed
        
We are by ourselves;

          With lorde3, wyth ladyes, with alle þat
          lyf bere.
        

          & now 3e ar here, iwysse, & we bot oure one;
        
My lord and his men are far off.

          "My lorde & his lede3 ar on lenþe faren,
        
Other men are in their beds, so are my maidens.
1232

          Oþer burne3 in her bedde, & my burde3 als,
        
The door is safely closed.

          Þe dor drawen, & dit with a derf haspe;
        
Since I have him in house that every one likes, I
        shall use my time well while it lasts.

          & syþen I haue in þis hous hym þat al lyke3,
        

          I schal ware my whyle wel, quyl hit laste3,
        
1236

          with tale;
        
Ye are welcome to my body.

          3e ar welcum to my cors,
        

          Yowre awen won to wale,
        

          Me be-houe3 of fyne force,
        
I shall be your servant." 1240

          Your seruaunt be & schale."
        


1 This word is illegible in the MS.
      


      V.
    



          "In god fayth," quod Gawayn, "gayn hit me þynkke3,
        
"I am unworthy," says Sir Gawayne, "to reach to
        such reverence as ye rehearse.

          Þa3 I be not now he þat 3e of speken;
        

          To reche to such reuerence as 3e reherce here
        
1244

          I am wy3e vn-worþy, I wot wel my-seluen;
        

          Bi God, I were glad, & yow god þo3t,
        
I shall be glad, however, to please you by word,
        or service."

          At sa3e oþer at seruyce þat I sette my3t
        

          To þe plesaunce of your prys, hit were a pure ioye."
        
1248

          "In god fayth, sir Gawayn," quod þe gay lady,
        

          "Þe prys & þe prowes þat plese3 al oþer,
        

          If I hit lakked, oþer set at ly3t, hit were littel daynté;
        
"There are ladies," says his visitor, "who would
        prefer thy company

          Bot hit ar ladyes in-no3e, þat leuer wer nowþe
        
1252

          Haf þe hende in hor holde, as I þe habbe here,
        

          To daly witt derely your daynté worde3,
        

          Keuer hem comfort, & colen her care3,
        
to much of the gold that they possess."

          Þen much of þe garysourn oþer golde þat1
          þay hauen;
        
1256

          Bot I louue2 þat ilk lorde þat þe lyfte halde3,
        

          I haf hit holly in my honde þat al desyres,
        

          þur3e grace."
        

          Scho made hym so gret chere,
        
[Fol. 108.] 1260

          Þat wat3 so fayr of face,
        
The knight answers the lady's questions.

          Þe kny3t with speches skere,
        

          A[n]swared to vche a cace.
        


1 MS. þat þat. 2 louie or loune (?).
      


      VI.
    


Gawayne tells her that he prefers her
        conversation before that of all others.

          "Madame," quod þe myry mon, "Mary yow 3elde,
        
1264

          For I haf founden, in god fayth, yowre fraunchis
          nobele,
        

          & oþer ful much of oþer folk fongen hor dede3;
        

          Bot þe daynté þat þay delen for my disert nysen,
        

          Hit is þe worchyp of your-self, þat no3t hot wel conne3."
        
The lady declares by Mary, 1268

          "Bi Mary," quod þe menskful, "me þynk hit anoþer;
        

          For were I worth al þe wone of wymmen alyue,
        

          & al þe wele of þe worlde were in my honde,
        
that were she about to choose her a lord,

          & I schulde chepen & chose, to cheue me a lorde,
        
1272

          For þe costes þat I haf knowen vpun þe kny3t here,
        

          Of bewté, & debonerté, & blyþe semblaunt,
        
she would select Gawayne before any man on earth.

          & þat I haf er herkkened, & halde hit here trwee,
        

          Þer schulde no freke vpon folde bifore yow be chosen."
        
1276

          "I-wysse, worþy," quod þe wy3e, "3e haf waled wel better,
        
Gawayne tells her that he will become her own
        knight and faithful servant.

          Bot I am proude of þe prys þat 3e put on me,
        

          & soberly your seruaunt my souerayn I holde
          yow,
        

          & yowre kny3t I be-com, & Kryst yow for-3elde."
        
1280

          Þus þay meled of much-quat, til myd-morn paste,
        

          & ay þe lady let lyk, a1 hym loued mych;
        
The remembrance of his adventure prevents him
        from thinking of love.

          Þe freke ferde with defence, & feted ful fayre.
        

          Þa3 I were burde bry3test, þe burde in mynde hade,
        
1284

          Þe lasse luf in his lode, for lur þat he so3t,
        

          boute hone;
        

          Þe dunte þat schulde2 hym deue,
        

          & nede3 hit most be done;
        
The lady takes leave of Sir Gawayne. 1288

          Þe lady þenn spek of leue.
        

          He granted hir ful sone.
        


1 and (?) 2 sclulde, in MS.
      


      VII.
    


With a laughing glance, she says,

          Þenne ho gef hym god-day, & wyth a glent la3ed.
        

          & as ho stod, ho stonyed hym wyth ful stor worde3:
        
"I am doubtful whether ye be Gawayne.
1292

          "Now he þat spede3 vche spech, þis disport 3elde yow!
        

          Bot þat 3e be Gawan, hit got3 in mynde."
        

          "Quer-fore?" quod þe freke, & freschly he aske3,
        

          Ferde lest he hade fayled in fourme of his castes;
        
1296

          Bot þe burde hym blessed, & bi þis skyl sayde,
        
[Fol. 108b.]

          "So god as Gawayn gaynly is halden,
        

          & cortaysye is closed so clene in hym-seluen,
        
Were it he, surely, ere this, he would have
        craved a kiss."

          Couth not ly3tly haf lenged so long wyth a lady,
        
1300

          Bot he had craued a cosse, bi his courtaysye,
        

          Bi sum towch of summe tryfle, at sum tale3 ende."
        
"I shall kiss," says the knight, "at your
        commandment."

          Þen quod Wowen, "I-wysse, worþe as yow lyke3,
        

          I schal kysse at your comaundement, as a kny3t falle3,
        
1304

          & fire1 lest he displese yow, so2 plede hit
          no more."
        
With that the lady catches him in her arms and
        kisses him.

          Ho comes nerre with þat, & cache3 hym in
          arme3,
        

          Loute3 luflych adoun, & þe leude kysse3;
        

          Þay comly bykennen to Kryst ayþer oþer;
        
1308

          Ho dos hir forth at þe dore, with-outen dyn more.
        

          & he ryches hym to ryse, & rapes hym sone,
        
Gawayne then rises and goes to mass.

          Clepes to his chamberlayn, choses his wede,
        

          Bo3e3 forth, quen he wat3 boun, blyþely to masse,
        
1312

          & þenne he meued to his mete, þat menskly hym
          keped,
        
He makes mirth all day till the moon rises,

          & made myry al day til þe mone rysed,
        

          with game;
        

          With3 neuer freke fayrer fonge,
        
between the "two dames," the older and the
        younger. 1316

          Bitwene two so dyngne dame,
        

          Þe alder & þe 3onge,
        

          Much solace set þay same.
        


1 fere (?). 2 fo, in MS. 3 Was (?) Nas
        (?).
      


      VIII.
    


Meanwhile the lord of the land and his men hunt
        in woods and heaths.

          And ay þe lorde of þe londe is lent on his gamne3,
        
1320

          To hunt in holte3 & heþe, at hynde3 barayne,
        

          Such a sowme he þer slowe bi þat þe sunne heldet,
        

          Of dos & of oþer dere, to deme were wonder.
        

          Þenne fersly þay flokked in folk at þe laste,
        
Quickly of the killed a "quarry" they
        make. 1324

          & quykly of þe quelled dere a querré þay maked;
        

          Þe best bo3ed þerto, with burne3 in-noghe,
        
Then they set about breaking the deer.

          Gedered þe grattest of gres þat þer were,
        

          & didden hem derely vndo, as þe dede aske3;
        
They take away the assay or fat,
1328

          Serched hem at þe asay, summe þat þer were,
        

          Two fyngeres þay fonde of þe fowlest of alle;
        
then they slit the slot and remove the erber.

          Syþen þay slyt þe slot, sesed þe erber,
        
They afterwards rip the four limbs and rend off
        the hide.

          Schaued wyth a scharp knyf, & þe schyre knitten;
        
1332

          Syþen rytte þay þe foure lymmes, & rent of þe hyde,
        
They next open the belly

          Þen brek þay þe bale, þe bale3 out token,
        
[Fol. 109.]and take out the bowels.

          Lystily forlancyng, & bere of þe knot;
        

          Þay gryped to þe gargulun, & grayþely departed
        
They then separate the weasand from the
        windhole and throw out the guts. 1336

          Þe wesaunt fro þe wynt-hole, & walt out þe gutte3;
        

          Þen scher þay out þe schuldere3 with her scharp
          knyue3,
        
The shoulders are cut out, and the breast divided
        into halves.

          Haled hem by a lyttel hole, to haue hole sydes;
        

          Siþen britned þay þe brest, & brayden hit in twynne,
        
1340

          & eft at þe gargulun bigyne3 on þenne,
        
The numbles are next removed.

          Ryue3 hit vp radly, ry3t to þe by3t,
        

          Voyde3 out þe a-vanters, & verayly þerafter


          Alle þe ryme3 by þe rybbe3 radly þay lance;
        
1344

          So ryde þay of by resoun bi þe rygge bone3,
        

          Euenden to þe haunche, þat henged alle samen,
        

          & heuen hit vp al hole, & hwen hit of þere,
        

          & þat þayneme for þe noumbles, bi nome as I trowe,
        
1348

          bi kynde;
        
By the fork of the thighs,

          Bi þe by3t al of þe þy3es,
        

          Þe lappe3 þay lance bi-hynde,
        
the flaps are hewn in two by the backbone.

          To hewe hit in two þay hy3es,
        
1352

          Bi þe bak-bon to vnbynde.
        



      IX.
    


After this the head and neck are cut off, and the
        sides severed from the chine.

          Boþe þe hede & þe hals þay hwen of þenne,
        

          & syþen sunder þay þe syde3 swyft fro þe chyne,
        

          & þe corbeles fee þay kest in a greue;1

1356

          Þenn þurled þay ayþer þik side þur3, bi þe rybbe,
        

          & henged þenne a[y]þer bi ho3es of þe fourche3,
        

          Vche freke for his fee, as falle3 forto haue.
        

          Vpon a felle of þe fayre best, fede þay þayr houndes,
        
With the liver, lights and paunches, they feed
        the hounds. 1360

          Wyth þe lyuer & þe ly3te3, þe leþer of þe paunche3,
        

          & bred baþed in blod, blende þer amonge3;
        

          Baldely þay blw prys, bayed þayr rachche3,
        
Then they make for home.

          Syþen fonge þay her flesche folden to home,
        
1364

          Strakande ful stoutly mony stif mote3.
        

          Bi þat þe dayly3t wat3 done, þe douthe wat3 al wonen
        

          In-to þe comly castel, þer þe kny3t bide3
        

          ful stille;
        
1368

          Wyth blys & bry3t fyr bette,
        

          Þe lord is comen þer-tylle,
        
Gawayne goes out to meet his host.

          When Gawayn wyth hym mette,
        

          Þer wat3 bot wele at wylle.
        


1 grene (?).
      


      X.
    


[Fol. 109b.]The lord commands all his
        household to assemble, 1372

          Thenne comaunded þe lorde in þat sale to
          samen alle þe meny,
        

          Boþe þe ladyes on loghe to ly3t with her burdes,
        
and the venison to be brought before him.

          Bi-fore alle þe folk on þe flette, freke3 he bedde3
        

          Verayly his venysoun to fech hym byforne;
        
He calls Gawayne, 1376

          & al godly in gomen Gaway[n] he called,
        

          Teche3 hym to þe tayles of ful tayt bestes,
        

          Schewe3 hym þe schyree grece schorne vpon rybbes.
        
and asks him whether he does not deserve much
        praise for his success in the chase.

          "How paye3 yow þis play? haf I prys wonnen?
        
1380

          Haue I þryuandely þonk þur3 my craft serued?"
        

          "3e I-wysse," quod þat oþer wy3e, "here is wayth fayrest
        
On the knight expressing himself satisfied, he is
        told to take the whole according to a former agreement between them.

          Þat I se3 þis seuen 3ere in sesoun of wynter."
        

          "& al I gif yow, Gawayn," quod þe gome þenne,
        
1384

          "For by a-corde of couenaunt 3e craue hit as your awen."
        

          "Þis is soth," quod þe segge, "I say yow þatilke,
        

          &1 I haf worthyly þis wone3 wyth-inne,
        
Gawayne gives the knight a comely kiss in return.

          I-wysse with as god wylle hit worþe3 to 3oure3."
        
1388

          He hasppe3 his fayre hals his arme3 wyth-inne,
        

          & kysses hym as comlyly as he2 couþe awyse:
        

          "Tas yow þere my cheuicaunce, I cheued no more,
        

          I wowche hit saf fynly, þa3 feler hit were."
        
1392

          "Hit is god," quod þe god mon, "grant mercy þerfore,
        
His host desires to know where he has gotten such
        weal.

          Hit may be such, hit is þe better, &1 3e me
          breue wolde
        

          Where 3e wan þis ilk wele, biwytte of hor3 seluen?"
        
As this does not enter into the covenant, he gets
        no answer to his question.

          "Þat wat3 not forward," quod he, "frayst me no more,
        
1396

          For 3e haftan þat yow tyde3, trawe3e non oþer


          3e mowe."
        

          Þay la3ed, & made hem blyþe,
        
They then proceed to supper, where were dainties
        new and enough.

          Wyth lote3 þat were to lowe,
        
1400

          To soper þay 3ede asswyþe,
        

          Wyth dayntes nwe in-nowe.
        


1 And = an. 2 ho, in MS. 3 your (?).
      


      XI.
    


By the hearth they sit.

          And syþen by þe chymné in chamber þay seten.
        
Wine is carried round.

          Wy3e3 þe walle wyn we3ed to hem oft,
        
1404

          & efte in her bourdyng þay bayþen in þe morn,
        

          To fylle þe same forwarde3 þat þay by-fore maden,
        
Again Sir Gawayne and his host renew their
        agreement.

          Þat chaunce so bytyde3 hor cheuysaunce to chaunge,
        

          What nwe3 so þay nome, at na3t quen þay metten

1408

          Þay acorded of þe couenaunte3 byfore þe court alle;
        
[Fol. 110.]

          Þe beuerage wat3 bro3t forth in bourde at þat tyme;
        
Then they take leave of each other and hasten to
        bed.

          Þenne þay louelych le3ten leue at þe last,
        

          Vche burne to his bedde busked bylyue.
        
Scarce had the cock cackled thrice when the lord
        was up. 1412

          Bi þat þe coke hade crowe31 & cakled bot þryse,
        

          Þe lorde wat3 lopen of his bedde, [&] þe leude3 vch one,
        

          So þat þe mete & þe masse wat3 metely delyuered;
        

          Þe douthe dressed to þe wod, er any day sprenged,
        
1416

          to chace;
        
With his hunters and horns they pursue the chase.

          He3 with hunte & horne3,
        

          Þur3 playne3 þay passe in space,
        

          Vn-coupled among þo þorne3,
        
1420

          Rache3 þat ran on race.
        


1 crowed (?).
      


      XII.
    


The hunters cheer on the hounds,

          Sone þay calle of a quest in aker syde,
        

          Þe hunt re-hayted þe hounde3, þat hit fyrst mynged,
        
which fall to the scent forty at once.

          Wylde worde3 hym warp wyth a wrast noyce;
        
1424

          Þe hownde3 þat hit herde, hastid þider swyþe,
        

          & fellen as fast to þe fuyt, fourty at ones;
        

          Þenne such a glauerande glam of gedered rachche3
        

          Ros, þat þe rochere3 rungen aboute;
        
1428

          Huntere3 hem hardened with horne & wyth
          muthe.
        
All come together by the side of a cliff.

          Þen al in a semblé sweyed to-geder,
        

          Bitwene a flosche in þat fryth, & a foo cragge;
        

          In a knot, bi a clyffe, at þe kerre syde,
        
1432

          Þer as þe rogh rocher vn-rydely wat3 fallen,
        

          [Þay] ferden to þe fyndyng, & freke3 hem after;
        
They look about on all sides,

          Þay vmbe-kesten þe knarre & þe knot boþe.
        

          Wy3e3, whyl þay wysten wel wyt inne hem hit were,
        
1436

          Þe best þat þer breued wat3 wyth þe blod hounde3.
        
and beat on the bushes.

          Þenne þay beten on þe buske3, & bede hym vp ryse,
        

          & he vnsoundyly out so3t segge3 ouer-þwert,
        
Out there rushes a fierce wild boar,

          On þe sellokest swyn swenged out þere,
        
1440

          Long sythen for1 þe sounder þat wi3t for-olde,
        

          For he wat3 b[este &] bor alþer grattest,
        

          [And eue]re quen he gronyed, þenne greued mony,
        
At the first thrust he fells three to the ground.

          For [þre a]t þe fyrst þrast he þry3t to þe erþe,
        
1444

          & [sped hym] forth good sped, boute spyt more,
        

          [Ande þay] halowed hyghe ful hy3e & hay! hay! cryed
        
[Fol. 110b.]

          Haden horne3 to mouþe heterly rechated;
        
Full quickly the hunters pursue him.

          Mony wat3 þe myry mouthe of men & of hounde3,
        
1448

          Þat buskke3 after þis bor, with bost & wyth
          noyse,
        

          To quelle;
        

          Ful oft he byde3 þe baye,
        

          & mayme3 þe mute Inn-melle,
        
However, he attacks the hounds, causing them to
        yowl and yell. 1452

          He hurte3 of þe hounde3, & þay
        

          Ful 3omerly 3aule & 3elle.
        


1 fro (?).
      


      XIII.
    


The bowmen send their arrows after this wild
        swine,

          Schalke3 to schote at hym schowen to þenne,
        

          Haled to hym of her arewe3, hitten hym oft;
        
1456

          Bot þe poynte3 payred at þe pyth þat py3t in his
          schelde3,
        

          & þe barbe3 of his browe bite non wolde,
        
but they glide off shivered in pieces.

          Þa3 þe schauen schaft schyndered in pece3,
        

          Þe hede hypped a3ayn, were-so-euer hit hitte;
        
Enraged with the blows, 1460

          Bot quon þe dynte3 hym dered of her dry3e stroke3,
        

          Þen, brayn-wod for bate, on burne3 he rase3,
        
he attacks the hunters.

          Hurte3 hem ful heterly þer he forth hy3e3,
        

          & mony ar3ed þerat, & on-lyte dro3en.
        
1464

          Bot þe lorde on a ly3t horce launces hym after,
        
The lord of the land blows his bugle,

          As burne bolde vpon bent his bugle he blowe3,
        

          He rechated, & r[ode]1 þur3 rone3 ful þyk,
        

          Suande þis wy[ld]e swyn til þe sunne schafted.
        
and pursues the boar. 1468

          Þis day wyth þis ilk dede þay dryuen on þis wyse,
        

          Whyle oure luflych lede lys in his bedde,
        
All this time Gawayne lies a-bed.

          Gawayn grayþely at home, in gere3 ful ryche
        

          of hewe;
        
1472

          Þe lady no3t for3ate,
        

          Com to hym to salue,
        

          Ful erly ho wat3 hym ate,
        

          His mode forto remwe.
        


1 The MS. is here almost illegible.
      


      XIV.
    


The lady of the castle again visits Sir Gawayne.
1476

          Ho commes to þe cortyn, & at þe kny3t totes,
        

          Sir Wawen her welcumed worþy on fyrst,
        

          & ho hym 3elde3 a3ayn, ful 3erne of hir worde3,
        
Softly she sits by his side,

          Sette3 hir sof[t]ly by his syde, & swyþely ho la3e3,
        
1480

          & wyth a luflych loke ho layde1 hym þyse worde3:
        

          "Sir, 3if 3e be Wawen, wonder me þynkke3,
        

          Wy3e þat is so wel wrast alway to god,
        

          & conne3 not of compaynye þe coste3 vnder-take,
        
[Fol. 111] 1484

          & if mon kennes yow hom to knowe, 3e kest hom of your
          mynde;
        
and tells the knight that he has forgotten what
        she taught him the day before.

          Þou hat3 for-3eten 3ederly þat 3isterday I ta3tte
        

          alder-truest token of talk þat I cowþe."
        

          "What is þat?" quod þe wyghe, "I-wysse I wot neuer,
        
1488

          If hit be sothe þat 3e breue, þe blame is myn awen."
        
"I taught you of kissing," she says, "that
        becomes every knight."

          "3et I kende yow of kyssyng," quod þe clere þenne,
        

          "Quere-so countenaunce is couþe, quikly to clayme,
        

          Þat bicumes vche a kny3t, þat cortaysy vses."
        
1492

          "Do way," quod þat derf mon, "my dere, þat speche,
        
Gawayne says that he must not take that which is
        forbidden.

          For þat durst I not do, lest I denayed were,
        

          If I were werned, I were wrang I-wysse, 3if I profered."
        

          "Ma fay," quod þe mere wyf, "3e may not be werned,
        
He is told that he is strong enough to enforce
        it. 1496

          3e ar stif in-noghe to constrayne wyth strenkþe, 3if yow
          lyke3,
        

          3if any were so vilanous þat yow denaye2 wolde."
        

          "3e, be God," quod Gawayn, "good is your speche,
        

          Bot þrete is vn-þryuande in þede þer I lende,
        
The knight replies that every gift is worthless
        that is not given willingly. 1500

          & vche gift þat is geuen not with goud wylle;
        

          I am at your comaundement, to kysse quen yow lyke3,
        

          3e may lach quen yow lyst, & leue quen yow þynkke3,
        

          in space."
        
The lady stoops down and kisses him. 1504

          Þe lady loute3 a-doun,
        

          & comlyly kysses his face,
        

          Much speche þay þer expoun,
        

          Of druryes greme & grace.
        


1 sayde (?). 2 de vaye, in MS.
      


      XV.
    


"I would learn," she says, "why you, who are so
        young and active, 1508

          "I woled1 wyt at yow, wy3e," þat worþy þer sayde,
        

          "& yow wrathed not þer-wyth, what were þe skylle,
        

          Þat so 3ong & so 3epe, as 3e [ar] at þis tyme,
        

          So cortayse, so kny3tyly, as 3e ar knowen oute,
        
so skilled in the true sport of love,
1512

          & of alle cheualry to chose, þe chef þyng a-losed,
        

          Is2 þe lel layk of luf, þe lettrure of armes;
        

          F[or] to telle of þis tenelyng of þis trwe kny3te3,
        

          Hit is þe tytelet, token, & tyxt of her werkke3,
        
1516

          How le[des] for her lele luf hor lyue3 han auntered,
        

          Endured for her drury dulful stounde3,
        

          & after wenged with her walour &
          voyded her care,
        
and so renowned a knight,

          & bro3t blysse in-to boure, with bountees
          hor awen.
        
1520

          & 3e ar kny3t com-lokest kyd of your elde,
        
[Fol. 111b.]

          Your worde & your worchip walke3 ay quere,
        

          & I haf seten by your-self here sere twyes,
        
have never talked to me of love.

          3et herde I neuer of your hed helde no worde3
        
1524

          Þat euer longed to luf, lasse ne more;
        
You ought to show a young thing like me some
        token of 'true-love's crafts.'

          & 3e, þat ar so cortays & coynt of your hetes,
        

          Oghe to a 3onke þynk 3ern to schewe,
        

          & teche sum tokene3 of trweluf craftes.
        
1528

          Why ar 3e lewed, þat alle þe los welde3,
        

          Oþer elles 3e demen me to dille, your dalyaunce
          to herken?
        

          for schame!
        

          I com hider sengel, & sitte,
        
1532

          To lerne at yow sum game,
        
So teach me of your 'wit' while my lord is from
        home."

          Dos, teche3 me of your wytte,
        

          Whil my lorde is fro hame."
        


1 wolde (?). 2 In (?).
      


      XVI.
    


"It is a great pleasure to me," says Sir Gawayne,
        "to hear you talk,

          "In goud fayþe," quod Gawayn, "God yow for3elde,
        
1536

          Gret is þe gode gle, & gomen to me huge,
        

          Þat so worþy as 3e wolde wynne hidere,
        

          & pyne yow with so pouer a mon, as play wyth
          your kny3t,
        

          With any skynne3 countenaunce, hit keuere3
          me ese;
        
but I cannot undertake the task to expound
        true-love and tales of arms. 1540

          Bot to take þe toruayle1 to my-self, to trwluf expoun,
        

          & towche þe teme3 of tyxt, & tale3 of arme3,
        

          To yow þat, I wot wel, welde3 more sly3t
        

          Of þat art, bi þe half, or a hundreth of seche
        
1544

          As I am, oþer euer schal, in erde þer I leue,
        

          Hit were a fole fele-folde, my fre, by my trawþe.
        
I will, however, act according to your will,

          I wolde yowre wylnyng worche at my my3t,
        

          As I am hy3ly bihalden, & euer-more wylle
        
and ever be your servant." 1548

          Be seruaunt to your-seluen, so saue me dry3tyn!"
        

          Þus hym frayned þat fre, & fondet hym ofte,
        

          Forto haf wonnen hym to wo3e, what-so scho þo3t elle3,
        
Thus Gawayne defends himself.

          Bot he de fended hym so fayr, þat no faut semed,
        
1552

          Ne non euel on nawþer halue, nawþer þay wysten,
        

          bot blysse;
        

          Þay la3ed & layked longe,
        

          At þe last scho con hym kysse,
        
The lady having kissed the knight, takes leave of
        him. 1556

          Hir leue fayre con scho fonge,
        

          & went hir waye Iwysse.
        


1 tornayle (?).
      


      XVII.
    


Gawayne rises, hears mass, and then dines.

          Then ruþes hym þe renk, & ryses to þe masse,
        
[Fol. 112.]

          & siþen hor diner wat3 dy3t & derely serued.
        
Meanwhile the lord pursues the wild boar,
1560

          Þe lede with þe ladye3 layked alle day,
        

          Bot þe lorde ouer þe londe3 launced ful ofte,
        

          Swe3 his vncely swyn, þat swynge3 bi þe bonkke3,
        
that bit the backs of his hounds asunder,

          & bote þe best of his brache3 þe bakke3 in sunder;
        
1564

          Þer he bode in his bay, tel1 bawe-men hit breken,
        

          & made2 hym, maw-gref his bed, forto mwe vtter;
        
and caused the stiffest of the hunters to start.

          So felle flone3 per flete, when þe folk gedered;
        

          Bot 3et þe styffest to start bi stounde3 he made,
        
1568

          Til at þe last he wat3 so mat, he my3t no more renne,
        
The boar runs into a hole in a rock by the side
        of a brook.

          Bot in þe hast þat he my3t, he to a hole wynne3,
        

          Of a rasse, bi a rokk, þer renne3 þe boerne,
        

          He gete þe bonk at his bak, bigyne3 to scrape,
        
The froth foams at his mouth. 1572

          Þe froþe femed3 at his mouth vnfayre bi þe wyke3,
        

          Whette3 his whyte tusche3; with hym þen
          irked
        

          Alle þe burne3 so bolde, þat hym by stoden,
        
None durst approach him,

          To nye hym on-ferum, bot ne3e hym non durst
        
1576

          for woþe;
        

          He hade hurt so mony byforne,
        

          Þat al þu3t4 þenne ful loþe,
        
so many had he torn with his tusks.

          Be more wyth his tusche3 torne,
        
1580

          Þat breme wat3 [&] brayn-wod bothe.
        


1 til (?). 2 madee, in MS. 3 fomed (?).
        4 þo3t (?).
      


      XVIII.
    


The knight, seeing the boar at bay,

          Til þe kny3t com hym-self, kachande his blonk,
        

          Sy3 hym byde at þe bay, his burne3 bysyde,
        
alights from his horse,

          He ly3tes luflych1 adoun, leue3 his corsour,
        
1584

          Brayde3 out a bry3t bront, & bigly forth stryde3,
        

          Founde3 fast þur3 þe forth, þer þe felle byde3,
        
and seeks to attack him with his sword.

          Þe wylde wat3 war of þe wy3e with weppen in
          honde,
        

          Hef hy3ly þe here, so hetterly he fnast,
        
1588

          Þat fele ferde for þe freke3,2 lest felle hym þe
          worre;
        
The "swine sets out" upon the man,

          Þe swyn sette3 hym out on þe segge euen,
        

          Þat þe burne & þe bor were boþe vpon hepe3,
        

          In þe wy3t-est of þe water, þe worre hade þat oþer;
        
who, aiming well, 1592

          For þe mon merkke3 hym wel, as þay mette fyrst,
        

          Set sadly þe scharp in þe slot euen,
        
wounds him in the pit of the stomach.

          Hit hym vp to þe hult, þat þe hert schyndered,
        

          & he 3arrande hym 3elde, & 3edoun3 þe
          water,
        
1596

          ful tyt;
        
[Fol. 112b.]

          A hundreth hounde3 hym hent,
        
The boar is soon bitten to death by a hundred
        hounds.

          Þat bremely con hym bite,
        

          Burne3 him bro3t to bent,
        
1600

          & dogge3 to dethe endite.
        


1 MS. luslych. 2 freke (?). 3 3ede doun
        (?).
      


      XIX.
    


Then was there blowing of horns

          There wat3 blawyng of prys in mony breme home,
        

          He3e halowing on hi3e, with haþele3 þat my3t;
        
and baying of hounds.

          Brachetes bayed þat best, as bidden þe maystere3,
        
1604

          Of þat chargeaunt chace þat were chef huntes.
        
One wise in woodcraft begins to unlace the boar.

          Þenne a wy3e þat wat3 wys vpon wod crafte3,
        

          To vnlace þis bor lufly bigynne3;
        
First he hews off the head, then rends him by the
        back.

          Fyrst he hewes of his hed, & on hi3e sette3,
        
1608

          & syþen rende3 him al roghe bi þe rygge after,
        
He next removes the bowels, broils them on the
        ashes, and therewith rewards his hounds.

          Brayde3 out þe boweles, brenne3 hom on glede,
        

          With bred blent þer-with his braches rewarde3;
        

          Syþen he britne3 out þe brawen in bry3t brode [s]chelde3,
        
Then the hastlets are removed. 1612

          & hat3 out þe hastlette3, as hi3tly biseme3;
        
The two halves are next bound together and hung
        upon a pole.

          & 3et hem halche3 al hole þe halue3 to-geder,
        

          & syþen on a stif stange stoutly hem henges.
        

          Now with þis ilk swyn þay swengen to home;
        
The boar's head is borne before the knight, who
        hastens home. 1616

          Þe bores hed wat3 borne bifore þe burnes seluen,
        

          Þat him for-ferde in þe forþe, þur3 forse of his honde,
        

          so stronge;
        

          Til he se3 sir Gawayne,
        
1620

          In halle hym þo3t ful longe,
        
Gawayne is called to receive the spoil.

          He calde, & he com gayn,
        

          His fee3 þer for to fonge.
        



      XX.
    


The lord of the land is well pleased when he sees
        Sir Gawayne,

          Þe lorde ful lowde with lote, & la3ed myry,
        
1624

          When he se3e sir G: with solace he speke3;
        

          Þe goude ladye3 were geten, & gedered þe meyny,
        
He shows him the shields of the wild boar, and
        tells him of its length and breadth.

          He schewe3 hem þe schelde3, & schapes hem þe tale,
        

          Of þe largesse, & þe lenþe, þe liþerne3 alse,
        
1628

          Of þe were of þe wylde swyn, in wod þer he fled.
        

          Þat oþer kny3t ful comly comended his dede3,
        

          & praysed hit as gret prys, þat he proued hade;
        
Such a "brawn of a beast," Sir Gawayne says, he
        never has seen.

          For suche a brawne of a best, þe bolde burne sayde,
        
1632

          Ne such sydes of a swyn, segh he neuer are.
        

          Þenne hondeled þay þe hoge hed, þe hende mon hit
          praysed,
        
[Fol. 113.]

          & let lodly þerat þe lorde forte here:
        
Gawayne takes possession of it according to
        covenant,

          "Now Gawayn," quod þe god mon, "þis gomen is your awen,
        
1636

          Bi fyn for-warde & faste, faythely 3e knowe."
        

          "Hit is sothe," quod þe segge, "& as siker trwe;
        

          Alle my get I schal yow gif agayn, bi my trawþe."
        
and in return kisses his host,

          He [hent] þe haþel aboute þe halse, & hendely hym kysses,
        
1640

          & efter-sones of þe same he serued hym þere.
        

          "Now ar we euen," quod þe haþel, "in þis euen-tide,
        

          Of alle þe couenauntes þat we knyt, syþen I com hider,
        

          bi lawe;"
        
who declares his guest to be the best he knows.
1644

          Þe lorde sayde, "bi saynt Gile,
        

          3e ar þe best þat I knowe,
        

          3e ben ryche in a whyle,
        

          Such chaffer & 3e drowe."
        



      XXI.
    


Tables are raised aloft, 1648

          Þenne þay teldet table3 [on] trestes alofte,
        
cloths cast upon them,

          Kesten cloþe3 vpon, clere ly3t þenne
        
and torches are lighted.

          Wakned bi wo3e3, waxen torches
        

          Segge3 sette, & serued in sale al aboute;
        
With much mirth and glee, 1652

          Much glam & gle glent vp þer-inne,
        

          Aboute þe fyre vpon flet, & on fele wyse,
        
supper is served in the hall,

          At þe soper & after, mony aþel songe3,
        

          As coundutes of kryst-masse, & carole3 newe,
        
1656

          With alle þe manerly merþe þat mon may of telle.
        
and ever our lovely knight by the lady sits,

          & euer oure luflych kny3t þe lady bi-syde;
        

          Such semblaunt to þat segge semly ho made,
        
who does all she can to please her companion.

          Wyth stille stollen countenaunce, þat stalworth to
          plese,
        
1660

          Þat al for-wondered wat3 þe wy3e, & wroth with hym-seluen,
        

          Bot he nolde not for his nurture nurne hir a-3ayne3,
        

          Bot dalt with hir al in daynte, how-se-euer
          þe dede turned
        

          to wrast;
        
When they had long played in the hall,
1664

          Quen þay hade played in halle,
        

          As longe as hor wylle hom last,
        
they proceeded "to chamber."

          To chambre he1 con hym calle,
        

          & to þe chem-ne þay past.
        


1 ho (?).
      


      XXII.
    


There they drank and discoursed. 1668

          Ande þer þay dronken, & dalten, & demed eft nwe,
        

          To norne on þe same note, on nwe3ere3 euen;
        
Gawayne begs leave to depart on the morrow.

          Bot þe kny3t craued leue, to kayre on þe morn,
        

          For hit wat3 ne3 at þe terme, þat he to1 schulde.
        
[Fol. 113b.] 1672

          Þe lorde hym letted of þat, to lenge hym resteyed,
        
His host swears to him,

          & sayde, "as I am trwe segge, I siker my trawþe,
        
that he shall come to the Green Chapel on New
        Year's morn long before prime.

          Þou schal cheue to þe grene chapel, þy charres to make,
        

          Leude, on nw3ere3 ly3t, longe bifore pryme:
        
1676

          For-þy þow lye in þy loft, & lach þyn ese,
        

          & I schal hunt in þis holt, & halde þe towche3,
        

          Chaunge wyth þe cheuisaunce, bi þat I charre hider;
        

          For I haf fraysted þe twys, & faythful I fynde þe,
        
1680

          Now þrid tyme þrowe best þenk on þe morne,
        

          Make we mery quyl we may, & mynne vpon Ioye,
        

          For þe lur may mon lach, when so mon lyke3."
        

          Þis wat3 grayþely graunted, & Gawayn is lenged,
        
Our knight consents to remain for another night.
1684

          Bliþe bro3t wat3 hym drynk, & þay to bedde 3eden,
        

          with li3t;
        
Full still and softly he sleeps all night.

          Sir G: lis & slepes,
        

          Ful stille & softe al ni3t;
        
Early in the morning the lord is up. 1688

          Þe lorde þat his crafte3 kepes,
        

          Ful erly he wat3 di3t.
        


1 te (?).
      


      XXIII.
    


After mass, a morsel he take with his men.

          After messe a morsel1 he & his men token,
        

          Miry wat3 þe mornyng, his mounture he askes;
        
Then were all on their horses before the
        hall-gates. 1692

          Alle þe haþeles þat on horse schulde helden hym after,
        

          Were boun busked on hor blonkke3, bi-fore2 þe halle
          3ate3;
        
It was a clear frosty morning.

          Ferly fayre wat3 þe folde, for þe forst clenged,
        

          In rede rudede vpon rak rises þe sunne,
        
The hunters, dispersed by a wood's side,
1696

          & ful clere coste33 þe clowdes of þe welkyn.
        

          Hunteres vnhardeled bi a holt syde,
        

          Rocheres roungen bi rys, for rurde of her hornes;
        
come upon the track of a fox,

          Summe fel in þe fute, þer þe fox bade,
        
1700

          Trayle3 ofte a trayteres4, bi traunt of her
          wyles;
        

          A kenet kryes þerof, þe hunt on hym calles,
        

          His fela3es fallen hym to, þat fnasted ful þike,
        
which is followed up by the hounds.

          Runnen forth in a rabel, in his ry3t fare;
        
1704

          & he fyske3 hem by-fore, þay founden hym sone,
        
They soon get sight of the game,

          & quen þay seghe hym with sy3t, þay sued hym
          fast,
        

          Wre3ande h[ym] ful [w]eterly with a wroth noyse;
        
and pursue him through many a rough grove.

          & he trantes & tornayee3 þur3 mony tene greue;
        
1708

          Hamloune3, & herkene3, bi hegge3 ful ofte;
        
[Fol. 114.]The fox at last leaps over a
        spinny,

          At þe last bi a littel dich he lepe3 ouer a spenné,
        

          Stele3 out ful stilly bi a strothe rande,
        
and by a rugged path seeks to get clear from the
        hounds.

          Went haf wylt of þe wode, with wyle3 fro þe houndes,
        
1712

          Þenne wat3 he went, er he wyst, to5 a wale tryster,
        
He comes upon one of the hunting stations, where
        he is attacked by the dogs.

          Þer þre þro at a þrich þrat hym at ones,
        

          al graye;
        
However, he slips them,

          He blenched a3ayn bilyue,
        
1716

          & stifly start onstray,
        

          With alle þe wo on lyue,
        
and makes again for the wood.

          To þe wod he went away.
        


1 MS. nnorsel. 2 bi-forere, in MS. 3
        caste3 (?). 4 trayveres (?). 5 to to, in MS.
      


      XXIV.
    


Then was it fine sport to listen to the hounds,

          Thenne wat3 hit lif vpon list to lyþen þe hounde3,
        
1720

          When alle þe mute hade hym met, menged to-geder,
        

          Suche a sor3e at þat sy3t þay sette on his hede,
        

          As alle þe clamberande clyffes hade clatered on hepes;
        
and the hallooing of the hunters.

          Here he wat3 halawed, when haþele3 hym metten,
        
1724

          Loude he wat3 3ayned, with 3arande speche;
        
There the fox was threatened and called a thief.

          Þer he wat3 þreted, & ofte þef called,
        

          & ay þe titleres at his tayl, þat tary he ne my3t;
        

          Ofte he wat3 runnen at, when he out rayked,
        
But Reynard was wily, 1728

          & ofte reled in a3ayn, so reniarde wat3 wylé.
        
and led them astray over mounts.

          & 3e he lad hem bi lag, mon, þe lorde & his meyny;
        

          On þis maner bi þe mountes, quyle myd, ouer,
          vnder,
        
Meanwhile the knight at home soundly sleeps
        within his comely curtains.

          Whyle þe hende kny3t at home holsumly slepe3,
        
1732

          With-inne þe comly cortynes, on þe colde morne.
        

          Bot þe lady for luf let not to slepe,
        

          Ne þe purpose to payre, þat py3t in hir hert,
        

          Bot ros hir vp radly, rayked hir þeder,
        
The lady of the castle, clothed in a rich mantle,
1736

          In a mery mantyle, mete to þe erþe,
        

          Þat wat3 furred ful fyne with felle3, wel pured,
        

          No hwe3 goud on hir hede, bot þe ha3er stones
        

          Trased aboute hir tressour, be twenty in clusteres;
        
her throat and bosom all bare, 1740

          Hir þryuen face & hir þrote þrowen al naked,
        

          Hir brest bare bifore, & bihinde eke.
        
comes to Gawayne's chamber,

          Ho come3 with-inne þe chambre dore, & closes
          hit hir after,
        
opens a window, and says,

          Wayne31 vp a wyndow, & on þe wy3e calle3,
        
1744

          & radly þus re-hayted hym, with hir
          riche worde3,
        

          with2 chere;
        
"Ah! man, how canst thou sleep,

          "A! mon, how may þou slepe,
        
[Fol. 114b.]this morning is so
        clear?"

          Þis morning is so clere?"
        
1748

          He wat3 in drowping depe,
        

          Bot þenne he con hir here.
        


1 wayue3(?). 2 bi, à sec. manu.
      


      XXV.
    


The knight was then dreaming of his forthcoming
        adventure at the Green Chapel.

          In dre3 droupyng of dreme draueled þat noble,
        

          As mon þat wat3 in mornyng of mony þro þo3tes,
        
1752

          How þat destiné schulde þat day [dy3t] his wyrde,
        

          At þe grene chapel, when he þe gome metes,
        

          & bi-houes his buffet abide, with-oute debate more;
        
He awakes and speaks to his fair visitor,

          Bot quen þat comly he keuered his wyttes,
        
1756

          Swenges out of þe sweuenes, & sware3 with hast.
        

          Þe lady luflych com la3ande swete,
        
who sweetly kisses him.

          Felle ouer his fayre face, & fetly him kyssed;
        

          He welcume3 hir worþily, with a wale chere;
        
1760

          He se3 hir so glorious, & gayly atyred,
        

          So fautles of hir fetures, & of so fyne hewes,
        
Great joy warms the heart of Sir Gawayne,

          Wi3t wallande Ioye warmed his hert;
        

          With smoþe smylyng & smolt þay smeten in-to
          merþe,
        
1764

          Þat al wat3 blis & bonchef, þat breke hem bi-twene,
        

          & wynne,
        

          Þay lanced wordes gode,
        

          Much wele þen wat3 þer-inne,
        
and "great peril between them stood."
1768

          Gret perile bi-twene hem stod,
        

          Nif mare of hir kny3t mynne.
        



      XXVI.
    


The knight is sorely pressed.

          For þat prynce of pris de-presed hym so þikke.
        

          Nurned hym so ne3e þe þred, þat nede hym bi-houed,
        
1772

          Oþer lach þer hir luf, oþer lodly re-fuse;
        

          He cared for his cortaysye, lest craþayn he were,
        
He fears lest he should become a traitor to his
        host.

          & more for his meschef, 3if he schulde make synne,
        

          & be traytor to þat tolke, þat þat telde a3t.
        
1776

          "God schylde," quod þe schalk, "þat schal not be-falle!"
        

          With luf-la3yng a lyt, he layd hym by-syde
        

          Alle þe speche3 of specialté þat sprange of her mouthe.
        

          Quod þat burde to þe burne, "blame 3e disserue,
        
1780

          3if 3e luf not þat lyf þat 3e lye nexte,
        

          Bifore alle þe wy3e3 in þe worlde, wounded in
          hert,
        
The lady inquire whether he has a mistress that
        he loves better than her.

          Bot if 3e haf a lemman, a leuer, þat yow lyke3 better,
        

          & folden fayth to þat fre, festned so harde,
        
[Fol. 115.] 1784

          Þat yow lausen ne lyst, & þat I leue nouþe;
        

          And þat 3e telle me þat, now trwly I pray yow,
        

          For alle þe lufe3 vpon lyue, layne not þe soþe,
        

          for gile."
        
Sir Gawayne swears by St. John that he neither
        has nor desires one. 1788

          Þe kny3t sayde, "be sayn Ion,"
        

          & smeþely con he smyle,
        

          "In fayth I welde ri3t non,
        

          Ne non wil welde þe quile."
        



      XXVII.
    


1792

          "Þat is a worde," quod þat wy3t, "þat worst is of alle,
        

          Bot I am swared for soþe, þat sore me þinkke3;
        
She then kisses him, sighing for sorrow.

          Kysse me now coraly, & I schal cach heþen,
        

          I may bot mourne vpon molde, as may þat much louyes."
        
1796

          Sykande ho swe3e doun, & semly hym kyssed,
        

          & siþen ho seueres hym fro, & says as ho
          stondes,
        

          "Now, dere, at þis de-partyng, do me þis ese,
        
She desires some gift,

          Gif me sumquat of þy gifte, þi gloue if1 hit were,
        
by which to remember him. 1800

          Þat I may mynne on þe mon, my mournyng to
          lassen."
        

          "Now Iwysse," quod þat wy3e, "I wolde I hade here
        

          Þe leuest þing for þy luf, þat I in londe welde,
        
Gawayne tells her that she is worthy of a better
        gift than he can bestow.

          For 3e haf deserued, forsoþe, sellyly ofte
        
1804

          More rewarde bi resoun, þen I reche my3t,
        

          Bot to dele yow for drurye, þat dawed bot neked;
        

          Hit is not your honour to haf at þis tyme
        

          A gloue for a garysoun, of Gawayne3 gifte3,
        
1808

          & I am here [on] an erande in erde3 vncouþe,
        
He has no men with mails containing precious
        things.

          & haue no men wyth no male3, with menskful þinge3;
        

          Þat mislyke3 me, ladé, for luf at þis tyme,2


          Iche tolke mon do as he is tan, tas to non ille,
        
1812

          ne pine."
        
Then says that lovesome,

          "Nay, hende of hy3e honours,"
        

          Quod þat lufsum vnder lyne,
        
"Though I had nought of yours, yet should ye have
        of mine."

          "Þa3 I hade o3t3 of youre3,
        
1816

          3et schulde 3e haue of myne."
        


1 of, in MS. 2 tyne, in MS. 3 no3t (?).
      


      XXVIII.
    


She offers him a gold ring,

          Ho ra3t hym a riche rynk1 of red golde werke3,
        

          Wyth a starande ston, stondande alofte,
        

          Þat bere blusschande beme3 as þe bry3t sunne;
        
1820

          Wyt 3e wel, hit wat3 worth wele ful hoge.
        
but he refuses to accept it,

          Bot þe renk hit renayed, & redyly he sayde,
        
[Fol. 115b.]

          "I wil no gifte3 for gode, my gay, at þis tyme;
        
as he has none to give in return.

          I haf none yow to norne, ne no3t wyl I take."
        
1824

          Ho bede hit hym ful bysily, & he hir bode wernes,
        

          & swere swyftel[y] his sothe, þat he hit sese nolde;
        
Very sorrowful was that fair one on account of
        his refusal.

          & ho sore þat he forsoke, & sayde þer-after,
        

          "If 3e renay my rynk, to ryche for hit seme3,
        
1828

          3e wolde not so hy3ly halden be to me,
        

          I schal gif yow my girdel, þat gaynes yow lasse."
        

          Ho la3t a lace ly3tly, þat2 leke vmbe hir syde3,
        
She takes off her "girdle,"

          Knit vpon hir kyrtel, vnder þe clere mantyle,
        
1832

          Gered hit wat3 with grene sylke, & with
          golde schaped,
        

          No3t bot arounde brayden, beten with fyngre3;
        

          & þat ho bede to þe burne, & blyþely bi-so3t
        
and beseeches him to take it.

          Þa3 hit vn-worþi were, þat he hit take wolde.
        
1836

          & he nay þat he nolde neghe in no wyse,
        
Gawayne again refuses to accept anything,

          Nauþer golde ne garysoun, er God hym grace sende,
        

          To acheue to þe chaunce þat he hade chosen þere.
        

          "& þerfore, I pray yow, displese yow no3t,
        
1840

          & lette3 be your bisinesse, for I bayþe hit yow neuer


          to graunte;
        

          I am derely to yow biholde,
        

          Bi-cause of your sembelaunt,
        
but promises, "ever in hot and in cold, to be her
        true servant." 1844

          & euer in hot & colde
        

          To be your trwe seruaunt.
        


1 ryng (?). 2 þat þat, in MS.
      


      XXIX.
    


"Do you refuse it," says the lady, because it is
        simple?

          "Now forsake 3e þis silke." sayde þe burde þenne,
        

          "For hit is symple in hit-self. & so hit wel seme3?
        
1848

          Lo! so hit is littel, & lasse hit is worþy;
        
Whoso knew the virtues that it possesses, would
        highly prize it.

          Bot who-so knew þe costes þat knit ar þer-inne,
        

          He wolde hit prayse at more prys, parauenture;
        
For he who is girded with this green lace,

          For quat gome so is gorde with þis grene lace,
        
1852

          While he hit hade hemely halched aboute,
        

          Þer is no haþel vnder heuen to-hewe hym þat my3t;
        
cannot be wounded or slain."

          For he my3t not he slayn, for sly3t vpon erþe."
        

          Þen kest þe kny3t, & hit come to his hert,
        
The knight thinks of his adventure at the Green
        Chapel. 1856

          Hit were a Iuel for þe Iopardé, þat hym iugged were,
        

          When he acheued to þe chapel, his chek forto fech;
        
The lady presses him to accept the lace.

          My31 he haf slypped to þe vn-slayn, þe sle3t were noble.
        
[Fol. 116.]

          Þenne ho þulged with hir þrepe, & þoled hir to speke,
        
1860

          & ho bere on hym þe belt, & bede hit hym swyþe,
        
He consents not only to take the girdle, but to
        keep the possession of it a secret.

          & he granted, & [ho] hym gafe with a goud wylle,
        

          & biso3t hym, for hir sake, disceuer hit neuer,
        

          Bot to lelly layne for2 hir lorde; þe leude hym
          acorde3.
        
1864

          Þat neuer wy3e schulde hit wyt, Iwysse, bot þay twayne,
        

          for no3te;
        

          He þonkked hir oft ful swyþe,
        

          Ful þro with hert & þo3t.
        
By that time the lady has kissed him thrice.
1868

          Bi þat on þrynne syþe,
        

          He hat3 kyst þe kny3t so to3t.
        


1 my3t (?). 2 fro (?).
      


      XXX.
    


Then she takes her leave.

          Thenne lachche3 ho hir leue, & leue3 hym þere,
        

          For more myrþe of þat mon mo3t ho not gete;
        
Gawayne then dresses himself, 1872

          When ho1 wat3 gon, sir G. gere3 hym sone,
        

          Rises, & riches hym in araye noble,
        
and conceals the love-lace about his person.

          Lays vp þe luf-lace, þe lady hym ra3t,
        

          Hid hit ful holdely, þer he hit eft fonde;
        
1876

          Syþen cheuely to þe chapel choses he þe waye,
        
He then hies to mass,

          Preuely aproched to a prest, & prayed hym þere
        

          Þat he wolde lyfte2 his lyf, & lern hym better,
        

          How his sawle schulde be saued, when he schuld seye heþen.
        
and shrives him of his misdeeds. 1880

          Þere he schrof hym schyrly, & schewed his mysdede3,
        

          Of þe more & þe mynne, & merci beseche3,
        
and prays for absolution.

          & of absolucioun he on þe segge calles;
        

          & he asoyled hym surely, & sette hym so clene,
        
He returns to the hall, and makes himself so
        merry among the ladies, 1884

          As dome3-day schulde haf ben di3t on þe morn.
        

          & syþen he mace hym as mery among þe fre ladyes,
        
with comely carols,

          With comlych caroles, & alle kynnes ioye,
        

          As neuer he did bot þat daye, to þe derk ny3t,
        
1888

          with blys;
        

          Vche mon hade daynte þare,
        
that they said,

          Of hym, & sayde Iwysse,
        
"Thus merry was he never before since hither he
        came."

          Þus myry he wat3 neuer are,
        
1892

          Syn he com hider, er þis.
        


1 he, in MS. 2 lyste (?).
      


      XXXI.
    


Gawayne's host is still in the field.

          Now hym lenge in þat lee, þer luf hym
          bi-tyde;
        

          3et is þe lorde on þe launde, ledande his gomnes,
        
He has destroyed the fox.

          He hat3 forfaren þis fox, þat he fol3ed longe;
        
1896

          As he sprent ouer a spenné, to spye þe schrewe,
        
[Fol. 116b.]

          Þer as he herd þe howndes, þat hasted hym swyþe,
        
He spied Reynard coming through a "rough grove,"

          Renaud com richchande þur3 a ro3e greue,
        

          & alle þe rabel in a res, ry3t at his hele3.
        
and tried to hit him with his sword. 1900

          Þe wy3e wat3 war of þe wylde, & warly abides,
        

          & brayde3 out þe bry3t bronde, & at þe best caste3;
        

          & he schunt for þe scharp, & schulde haf arered,
        
The fox "shunts," and is seized by one of the
        dogs.

          A rach rapes hym to, ry3t er he my3t,
        
1904

          & ry3t bifore þe hors fete þay fel on hym alle,
        

          & woried me þis wyly wyth a wroth noyse.
        
The lord takes him out of the hound's mouth.

          Þe lorde ly3te3 bilyue, & cache3 by1 sone,
        

          Rased hym ful radly out of þe rach mouþes,
        
1908

          Halde3 he3e ouer his hede, halowe3 faste,
        

          & þer bayen hym mony bray2 hounde3;
        
Hunters hasten thither with horns full many.

          Huntes hy3ed hem þeder, with horne3 ful mony,
        

          Ay re-chatande ary3t til þay þe renk se3en;
        
1912

          Bi þat wat3 comen his compeyny noble,
        

          Alle þat euer ber bugle blowed at ones,
        
It was the merriest meet that ever was heard.

          & alle þise oþer halowed, þat hade no hornes,
        

          Hit wat3 þe myriest mute þat euer men herde,
        
1916

          Þe rich rurd þat þer wat3 raysed for renaude saule,
        

          with lote;
        
The hounds are rewarded,

          Hor hounde3 þay þer rewarde,
        

          Her3 hede3 þay fawne & frote,
        
and then they take Reynard and "turn off his
        coat." 1920

          & syþen þay tan reynarde,
        

          & tyrnen of his cote.
        


1 hym (?). 2 braþ (?). 3 Her
        her, in MS.
      


      XXXII.
    


The hunters then hasten home.

          & þenne þay helden to home, for hit wat3 nie3 ny3t,
        

          Strakande ful stoutly in hor store horne3;
        
The lord at last alights at his dear home,
1924

          Þe lorde is ly3t at þe laste at hys lef home,
        

          Fynde3 fire vpon flet, þe freke þer by-side,
        

          Sir Gawayn þe gode, þat glad wat3 with alle,
        
where he finds Gawayne amusing the ladies.

          Among þe ladies for luf he ladde much ioye,
        
1928

          He were a bleaunt of blwe, þat bradde to þe erþe,
        

          His surkot semed hym wel, þat softe wat3 forred,
        

          & his hode of þat ilke henged on his schulder,
        
The knight comes forward and welcomes his host,

          Blande al of blaunner were boþe al aboute.
        
1932

          He mete3 me þis god mon in mydde3 þe flore,
        

          & al with gomen he hym gret, & goudly he sayde,
        

          "I schal fylle vpon fyrst oure forwarde3 nouþe,
        
[Fol. 117.]

          Þat we spedly han spoken, þer spared wat3 no drynk;"
        
and according to covenant kisses him thrice.
1936

          Þen acoles he [þe] kny3t, & kysses hym þryes,
        
(See l. 1868.)

          As sauerly & sadly as he hem sette couþe.
        
"By Christ," says the other, "ye have had much
        bliss!"

          "Bi Kryst," quod þat oþer kny3t, "3e cach much sele,
        

          In cheuisaunce of þis chaffer, 3if 3e hade goud chepe3."
        
1940

          "3e of þe chepe no charg," quod chefly þat oþer,
        

          "As is pertly payed þe chepe3 þat I a3te."
        

          "Mary," quod þat oþer mon, "myn is bi-hynde,
        
I have hunted all day and have gotten nothing,

          For I haf hunted al þis day, & no3t haf I geten,
        
but the skin of this foul fox, 1944

          Bot þis foule fox felle, þe fende haf þe gode3,
        
a poor reward for three such kisses."

          & þat is ful pore, for to pay for suche prys þinges,
        

          As 3e haf þry3t me here, þro suche þre cosses,
        

          so gode."
        
1948

          "I-no3," quod sir Gawayn,
        

          "I þonk yow, bi þe rode;"
        
He then tells him how the fox was slain.

          & how þe fox wat3 slayn,
        

          He tolde hym, as þay stode.
        



      XXXIII.
    


With much mirth and minstrelsy they made merry,
1952

          With merþe & mynstralsye, wyth mete3 at hor wylle,
        

          Þay maden as mery as any men mo3ten,
        

          With la3yng of ladies, with lote3
          of bordes;
        

          Gawayn & þe gode mon so glad were þay boþe,
        
1956

          Bot if þe douthe had doted, oþer dronken ben oþer,
        

          Boþe þe mon & þe meyny maden mony iape3,
        
until the time came for them to part.

          Til þe sesoun wat3 se3en, þat þay seuer moste;
        

          Burne3 to hor bedde be-houed at þe laste.
        
Gawayne takes leave of his host. 1960

          Þenne lo3ly his leue at þe lorde fyrst
        

          Fochche3 þis fre mon, & fayre he hym þonkke3;
        
and thanks him for his happy "sojourn."

          "Of such a sellyly1 soiorne, as I haf hade here,
        

          Your honour, at þis hy3e fest, þe hy3e kyng yow
          3elde!
        
1964

          I 3ef yow me for on of youre3, if yowre-self lyke3,
        

          For I mot nedes, as 3e wot, meue to morne;
        
He asks for a man to teach him the way to the
        Green Chapel.

          & 3e me take sum tolke, to teche, as 3e hy3t,
        

          Þe gate to þe grene chapel, as god wyl me suffer
        
1968

          To dele, on nw3ere3 day, þe dome of my wyrdes."
        

          "In god fayþe," quod þe god mon. "wyth a goud wylle;
        

          Al þat euer I yow hy3t, halde schal I rede."
        
A servant is assigned to him,

          Þer asyngnes he a seruaunt, to sett hym in
          þe waye,
        
[Fol. 117b.] 1972

          & coundue hym by þe downe3, þat he no drechch had,
        

          For to f[e]rk þur3 þe fryth, & fare at þe gaynest,
        

          bi greue.
        

          Þe lorde Gawayn con þonk,
        
1976

          Such worchip he wolde hym weue;
        
and then he takes leave of the ladies,

          Þen at þo ladye3 wlonk.
        

          Þe kny3t hat3 tan his leue.
        


1 selly (?).
      


      XXXIV.
    


kissing them sorrowfully.

          With care & wyth kyssyng he carppe3 hem tille,
        
1980

          & fele þryuande þonkke3 he þrat hom to haue,
        

          & þay 3elden hym a3ay[n] 3eply þat ilk;
        
They commend him to Christ.

          Þay bikende hym to Kryst, with ful colde sykynge3.
        
He then departs, thanking each one he meets "for
        his service and solace."

          Syþen fro þe meyny he menskly de-partes;
        
1984

          Vche mon þat he mette, he made hem a þonke,
        

          For his seruyse, & his solace, & his sere pyne,
        

          Þat þay wyth busynes had ben, aboute hym to serue;
        

          & vche segge as sore, to seuer with hym
          þere,
        
1988

          As þay hade wonde worþyly with þat wlonk euer.
        
He retires to rest but sleeps but little,

          Þen with ledes & ly3t he wat3 ladde to his
          chambre,
        

          & blybely bro3t to his bedde, to be at his rest;
        

          3if he ne slepe soundyly, say ne dar I,
        
for much has he to think of on the morrow.
1992

          For he hade muche on þe morn to mynne, 3if he wolde,
        

          in þo3t;
        
Let him there lie still.

          Let hym ly3e þere stille,
        

          He hat31 nere þat he so3t,
        
Be still awhile, and I shall tell how they
        wrought. 1996

          & 3e wyl a whyle be stylle,
        

          I schal telle yow how þay wro3t.
        


1 wat3 (?).
      


      [FYTTE THE FOURTH.]
    

      I.
    


New Year's Day approaches.

          Now ne3e3 þe nw3ere, & þe ny3t passe3,
        

          Þe day dryue3 to þe derk, as dry3tyn bidde3;
        
The weather is stormy. 2000

          Bot wylde wedere3 of þe worlde wakned þeroute,
        

          Clowdes kesten kenly þe colde to þe erþe,
        

          Wyth ny3e1 in-noghe of þe norþe, þe naked to tene;
        
Snow falls.

          Þe snawe snitered ful snart, þat snayped þe wylde;
        
2004

          Þe werbelande wynde wapped fro þe hy3e,
        
The dales are full of drift.

          & drof vche dale ful of dryftes ful grete.
        

          Þe leude lystened ful wel, þat le3 in his bedde,
        
Gawayne in his bed hears each cock that crows.

          Þa3 he lowke3 his lidde3, ful lyttel he slepes;
        
2008

          Bi vch kok þat crue, he knwe wel þe steuen.
        
[Fol. 118.]

          De-liuerly he dressed vp, er þe day sprenged,
        

          For þere wat3 ly3t of a lau[m]pe, þat lemed in his chambre;
        
He calls for his chamberlain, and bids him bring
        him his armour.

          He called to his chamberlayn, þat cofly hym swared,
        
2012

          & bede hym bryng hym his bruny, & his
          blonk sadel;
        

          Þat oþer ferke3 hym vp, & feche3 hym his
          wede3,
        

          & grayþe3 me sir Gawayn vpon a grett wyse.
        

          Fyrst he clad hym in his cloþe3, þe colde for to were;
        
2016

          & syþen his oþer harnays, þat holdely wat3 keped,
        

          Boþe his paunce, & his plate3, piked ful clene,
        
Men knock off the rust from his rich habergeon.

          Þe rynge32 rokked of þe roust, of his riche bruny;
        

          & al wat3 fresch as vpon fyrst, & he wat3 fayn þenne
        
2020

          to þonk;
        

          He hade vpon vche pece,
        

          Wypped ful wel & wlonk;
        
The knight then calls for his steed.

          Þe gayest in to Grece,
        
2024

          Þe burne bede bryng his blonk.
        


1 nywe (?). 2 rynke3 (?).
      


      II.
    


While he clothed himself in his rich weeds,

          Whyle þe wlonkest wedes he warp on hym-seluen;
        

          His cote, wyth be conysaunce of þe clere werke3,
        

          Ennurned vpon veluet vertuuus1 stone3,
        
2028

          Aboute beten, & bounden, enbrauded seme3,
        

          & fayre furred with-inne wyth fayre pelures.
        
he forgot not the "lace," the lady's gift,

          3et laft he not þe lace, þe ladie3 gifte,
        

          Þat for-gat not Gawayn, for gode of hym-seluen;
        
2032

          Bi he hade belted þe bronde vpon his bal3e haunche3,
        
but with it doubly girded his loins.

          Þenn dressed he his drurye double hym aboute;
        

          Swyþe sweþled vmbe his swange swetely, þat kny3t,
        

          Þe gordel of þe grene silke, þat gay wel bisemed,
        
2036

          Vpon þat ryol red cloþe, þat ryche wat3 to schewe.
        
He wore it not for its rich ornaments,

          Bot wered not þis ilk wy3e for wele þis gordel,
        

          For pryde of þe pendaunte3, þa3 polyst þay were,
        

          & þa3 þe glyterande golde glent vpon ende3,
        
"but to save himself when it behoved him to
        suffer." 2040

          Bot forto sauen hym-self, when suffer hym
          by-houed,
        

          To byde bale with-oute dabate, of bronde hym to
          were,
        

          oþer knyffe;
        

          Bi þat þe bolde mon boun,
        
2044

          Wynne3 þeroute bilyue,
        
All the renowned assembly he thanks full oft.

          Alle þe meyny of renoun,
        

          He þonkke3 ofte ful ryue.
        


1 vertuous (?).
      


      III.
    


[Fol. 118b.]Then was Gringolet
        arrayed,

          Thenne wat3 Gryngolet grayþe, þat gret wat3 & huge,
        
2048

          & hade ben soiourned sauerly, & in a
          siker wyse,
        
full ready to prick on.

          Hym lyst prik for poynt, þat proude hors þenne;
        

          Þe wy3e wynne3 hym to, & wyte3 on his lyre,
        

          & sayde soberly hym-self, & by his soth swere3,
        
2052

          "Here is a meyny in þis mote, þat on menske þenkke3,
        
Gawayne returns thanks for the honour and
        kindness shown to him by all.

          Þe mon hem maynteines, ioy mot þay haue;
        

          Þe leue lady, on lyue luf hir bityde;
        

          3if þay for charyté cherysen a gest,
        
2056

          & halden honour in her honde, þe haþel hem
          3elde,
        

          Þat halde3 þe heuen vpon hy3e, & also yow alle!
        

          & 3if I my3t lyf vpon londe lede any quyle,
        

          I schuld rech yow sum rewarde redyly, if I my3t."
        
He then steps into his saddle, 2060

          Þenn steppe3 he in-to stirop, & stryde3 alofte;
        

          His schalk schewed hym his schelde, on schulder he hit la3t,
        

          Gorde3 to Gryngolet, with his gilt hele3,
        
and "starts on the stone" without more delay.

          & he starte3 on þe ston, stod he no lenger,
        
2064

          to praunce;
        

          His haþel on hors wat3 þenne,
        

          Þat bere his spere & launce.
        
"This castle to Christ I commend; may he give it
        ever good chance!"

          "Þis kastel to Kryst I kenne,
        
2068

          He gef hit ay god chaunce!"
        



      IV.
    


The gates are soon opened.

          The brygge wat3 brayde doun, & þe brode 3ate3
        

          Vnbarred, & born open, vpon boþe halue;
        
The knight passes thereout,

          Þe burne blessed hym bilyue, & þe brede3 passed;
        
2072

          Prayses þe porter, bifore þe prynce kneled,
        

          Gef hym God & goud day, þat Gawayn he saue;
        
and goes on his way accompanied by his guide.

          & went on his way, with his wy3e one,
        

          Þat schulde teche hym to tourne to þat tene place,
        
2076

          Þer þe ruful race he schulde re-sayue.
        

          Þay bo3en bi bonkke3, þer bo3e3 ar bare,
        
They climb by cliffs,

          Þay clomben bi clyffe3, þer clenge3 þe colde;
        

          Þe heuen wat3 vp halt, bot vgly þer vnder,
        
2080

          Mist muged on þe mor, malt on þe mounte3,
        
where each "hill had a hat and a mist-cloak,"

          Vch hille hade a hatte, a myst-hakel huge;
        

          Broke3 byled, & breke, bi bonkke3 aboute,
        

          Schyre schaterande on schore3, þer þay doun
          schowued.
        
[Fol. 119.] 2084

          Welawylle wat3 þe way, þer þay bi wod schulden,
        
until daylight.

          Til hit wat3 sone sesoun, þat þe sunne ryses,
        

          þat tyde;
        
They were then on a "hill full high."

          Þay were on a hille ful hy3e,
        
2088

          Þe quyte snaw lay bisyde;
        
The servant bade his master abide, saying,

          Þe burne þat rod hym by
        

          Bede his mayster abide.
        



      V.
    


"I have brought you hither,

          "For I haf wonnen yow hider, wy3e, at þis tyme,
        
2092

          & now nar 3e not fer fro þat note place,
        
ye are not now far from the noted place.

          Þat 3e han spied & spuryed so specially after;
        

          Bot I schal say yow for soþe, syþen I yow knowe,
        

          & 3e ar a lede vpon lyue, þat I wel louy,
        
2096

          Wolde 3e worch bi my wytte, 3e worþed þe better.
        
Full perilous is it esteemed.

          Þe place þat 3e prece to, ful perelous is halden;
        
The lord of that 'waste' is stiff and stern.

          Þer wone3 a wy3e in þat waste, þe worst vpon erþe;
        

          For he is stiffe, & sturne, & to strike louies,
        
2100

          & more he is þen any mon vpon myddelerde,
        
His body is bigger 'than the best four in
        Arthur's house.'

          & his body bigger þen þe best fowre.
        

          Þat ar in Arþure3 hous, Hestor1 oþer
          oþer.
        

          He cheue3 þat chaunce at þe chapel grene;
        
None passes by the Green Chapel, 'that he does
        not ding to death with dint of his hand.' 2104

          Þer passes non bi þat place, so proude in his armes,
        

          Þat he ne dynne3 hym to deþe, with dynt of
          his honde;
        

          For he is a mon methles, & mercy non vses,
        
For be it churl or chaplain, monk, mass-priest,
        'or any man else,' he kills them all.

          For be hit chorle, oþer chaplayn, þat bi þe chapel rydes,
        
2108

          Monk, oþer masse-prest, oþer any mon elles,
        

          Hym þynk as queme hym to quelle, as quyk go hym
          seluen.
        

          For-þy I say þe as soþe as 3e in sadel sitte,
        

          Com 3e þere, 3e be kylled, [I] may þe kny3t rede,
        
2112

          Trawe 3e me þat trwely, þa3 3e had twenty lyues
        

          to spende;
        
He has lived there full long.

          He hat3 wonyd here ful 3ore,
        

          On bent much baret bende,
        
Against his dints sore ye may not defend you.
2116

          A3ayn his dynte3 sore,
        

          3e may not yow defende."
        


1 Hector (?).
      


      VI.
    


Wherefore, good Sir Gawayne, let this man alone.

          "For-þy, goude sir Gawayn, let þe gome one,
        

          & got3 a-way sum oþer gate; vpon Godde3 halue;
        
Go by some other region, 2120

          Cayre3 bi sum oþer kyth, þer Kryst mot yow spede;
        

          & I schal hy3 me hom a3ayn, & hete yow fyrre,
        
[Fol. 119b.]I swear by God and all
        His saints, that I will never say that ever ye attempted to flee from
        any man."

          Þat I schal swere bi God, & alle his gode hal3e3,
        

          As help me God & þe halydam, & oþe3 in-noghe,
        
2124

          Þat I schal lelly yow layne, & lance neuer tale,
        

          Þat euer 3e fondet to fle, for freke þat I wyst."
        

          "Grant merci;" quod Gawayn, & gruchyng
          he sayde,
        

          "Wel worth þe wy3e, þat wolde3 my gode,
        
2128

          & þat lelly me layne, I leue wel þou wolde3!
        
Gawayne replies that to shun this danger would
        mark him as a "coward knight."

          Bot helde þou hit neuer so holde, & I here passed,
        

          Founded for ferde for to fle, in fourme þat þou
          telle3,
        

          I were a kny3t kowarde, I my3t not1 be excused.
        
To the Chapel, therefore, he will go,
2132

          Bot I wy1 to þe chape1, for chaunce þat may falle,
        

          & talk wyth þat ilk tulk þe tale þat me lyste,
        

          Worþe hit wele, oþer wo, as þe wyrde lyke3
        

          hit hafe;
        
though the owner thereof were a stern knave.
2136

          Þa3e he be a sturn knape,
        

          To sti3tel, &2 stad with staue,
        
"Full well can God devise his servants for to
        save."

          Ful wel con dry3tyn schape,
        

          His seruaunte3 forto saue."
        


1 mot, in MS. 2 & &, in MS.
      


      VII.
    


"Mary!" quoth the other, "since it pleases thee
        to lose thy life, 2140

          "Mary!" quod þat oþer mon, "now þou so much
          spelle3,
        

          Þat þou wylt þyn awen nye nyme to þy-seluen,
        

          & þe lyst lese þy lyf, þe lette I ne kepe;
        
take thy helmet on thy head, and thy spear in thy
        hand, and ride down this path by yon rock-side,

          Haf here þi helme on þy hede, þi spere in þi honde,
        
2144

          & ryde me doun þis ilk rake, bi 3on rokke syde,
        
till thou come to the bottom of the valley;

          Til þou be bro3t to þe boþem of þe brem valay;
        
look a little to the left,

          Þenne loke a littel on þe launde, on þi lyfte honde,
        
and thou shalt see the Chapel itself and the man
        that guards it."

          & þou schal se in þat slade þe self chapel,
        
2148

          & þe borelych burne on bent, þat hit kepe3.
        

          Now fare3 wel on Gode3 half, Gawayn þe noble,
        

          For alle þe golde vpon grounde I nolde go with þe,
        

          Ne bere þe fela3schip þur3 þis fryth on fote fyrre."
        
Having thus spoken the guide takes leave of the
        knight. 2152

          Bi þat þe wy3e in þe wod wende3 his brydel,
        

          Hit þe hors with þe hele3, as harde as he my3t,
        

          Lepe3 hym ouer þe launde, & leue3 þe kny3t
          þere,
        

          al one.
        
"By God's self," says Sir Gawayne, "I will
        neither weep nor groan. 2156

          "Bi Godde3 self," quod Gawayn,
        

          "I wyl nauþer grete ne grone,
        
To God's will I am full ready."

          To Godde3 wylle I am ful bayn,
        

          & to hym I haf me tone."
        



      VIII.
    


[Fol. 120.]Then he pursues his journey,
2160

          Thenne gyrde3 he to Gryngolet, & gedere3 þe rake,
        

          Schowue3 in bi a schore, at a scha3e syde,
        
rides through the dale, and looks about.

          Ride3 þur3 þe ro3e bonk, ry3t to þe dale;
        

          & þenne he wayted hym aboute, & wylde hit hym
          þo3t,
        
He sees no sign of a resting-place, but only high
        and steep banks. 2164

          & se3e no syngne of resette, bisyde3 nowhere,
        

          Bot hy3e bonkke3 & brent, vpon boþe halue,
        

          & ru3e knokled knarre3, with knorned stone3;
        

          Þe skwe3 of þe scowtes skayued1 hym þo3t.
        
2168

          Þenne he houed, & wyth-hylde his hors at þat tyde,
        

          & ofte chaunged his cher, þe chapel to seche;
        
No chapel could he discern.

          He se3 non suche in no syde, & selly hym þo3t,
        

          Sone a lyttel on a launde, a lawe as hit we[re];
        
At last he sees a hill by the side of a stream;
2172

          A bal3 ber3, bi a bonke, þe brymme by-syde,
        

          Bi a for3 of a flode, þat ferked þare;
        

          Þe borne blubred þer-inne, as hit boyled hade.
        
thither he goes,

          Þe kny3t kache3 his caple, & com to þe lawe,
        
alights and fastens his horse to a branch of a
        tree. 2176

          Li3te3 doun luflyly, & at a lynde tache3
        

          Þe rayne, & his riche, with a ro3e braunche;
        
He walks around the hill, debating with himself
        what it might be,

          Þen[n]e he bo3e3 to þe ber3e, aboute hit he walke,
        

          D[e]batande with hym-self, quat hit be my3t.
        
2180

          Hit hade a hole on þe ende, & on ayþer syde,
        

          & ouer-growen with gresse in glodes ay
          where,
        

          & al wat3 hol3 in-with, nobot an olde caue,
        
and at last finds an old cave in the crag.

          Or a creuisse of an olde cragge, he couþe hit no3t deme
        
2184

          with spelle,
        

          "We,2 lorde," quod þe gentyle kny3t,
        

          "Wheþer þis be þe grene chapelle;
        
He prays that about midnight he may tell his
        matins.

          He my3t aboute myd-ny3t,
        
2188

          [Þ]e dele his matynnes telle!"
        


1 skayned (?). 2 wel (?).
      


      IX.
    


"Truly," says Sir Gawayne, "a desert is here,

          "Now i-wysse," quod Wowayn, "wysty is here;
        

          Þis oritore is vgly, with erbe3 ouer-growen;
        
a fitting place for the man in green to 'deal
        here his devotions in devil fashion.'

          Wel biseme3 þe wy3e wruxled in grene
        
2192

          Dele here his deuocioun, on þe deuele3 wyse;
        

          Now I fele hit is þe fende, in my fyue wytte3,
        

          Þat hat3 stoken me þis steuen, to strye me here;
        
It is most cursed kirk that ever I entered."

          Þis is a chapel of meschaunce, þat chekke hit by-tyde,
        
2196

          Hit is þe corsedest kyrk, þat euer i com inne!"
        
[Fol. 120b.]

          With he3e helme on his hede, his launce in his honde,
        
Roaming about he hears a loud noise,

          He rome3 vp to þe rokke of þo ro3 wone3;
        

          Þene herde he of þat hy3e hil, in a harde roche,
        
from beyond the brook. 2200

          Bi3onde þe broke, in a bonk, a wonder breme noyse,
        
It clattered like the grinding of a scythe on a
        grindstone.

          Quat! hit clatered in þe clyff, as hit cleue schulde,
        

          As one vpon a gryndelston hade grounden a syþe;
        
It whirred like a mill-stream.

          What! hit wharred, & whette, as water at a mulne,
        
2204

          What! hit rusched, & ronge, rawþe to here.
        

          Þenne "bi Godde," quod Gawayn, "þat gere as1
          I trowe,
        

          Is ryched at þe reuerence, me renk to mete,
        

          bi rote;
        
2208

          Let God worche we loo,
        
"Though my life I forgo," says the knight, "no
        noise shall terrify me."

          Hit helppe3 me not a mote,
        

          My lif þa3 I for-goo,
        

          Drede dot3 me no lote."
        


1 at, in MS.
      


      X.
    


Then cried he aloud, 2212

          Thenne þe kny3t con calle ful hy3e,
        
"Who dwells here discourse with me to hold?"

          "Who sti3tle3 in þis sted, me steuen to holde?
        
Now is the good Gawayne going aright

          For now is gode Gawayn goande ry3t here,
        

          If any wy3e o3t wyl wynne hider fast,
        
2216

          Oþer now, oþer neuer, his nede3 to spede."
        
He hears a voice commanding him to abide where he
        is.

          "Abyde," quod on on þe bonke, abouen ouer his hede,
        

          "& þou schal haf al in hast, þat I þe hy3t ones."
        

          3et he rusched on þat rurde, rapely a þrowe,
        
2220

          & wyth quettyng a-wharf, er he wolde ly3t;
        
Soon there comes out of a hole, with a fell
        weapon,

          & syþen he keuere3 bi a cragge, & come3 of a hole,
        

          Whyrlande out of a wro, wyth a felle weppen,
        
a Danish axe, quite new,

          A dene3 ax nwe dy3t, þe dynt with [t]o 3elde
        
2224

          With a borelych bytte, bende by þe halme,
        

          Fyled in a fylor, fowre fote large,
        

          Hit wat3 no lasse, bi þat lace þat lemed ful bry3t.
        
the "knight in green," clothed as before.

          & þe gome in þe erene gered as fyrst,
        
2228

          Boþe þe lyre & þe legge3, lokke3, & berde,
        

          Saue þat fayre on his fote he founde3 on þe erþe,
        

          Sette þe stele to þe stone, & stalked bysyde.
        
When he reaches the stream, he hops over and
        strides about.

          When he wan to þe watter, þer he wade nolde,
        
2232

          He hypped ouer on hys ax, & orpedly stryde3,
        

          Bremly broþe on a bent, þat brode wat3 a-boute,
        

          on snawe.
        
[Fol. 121.]He meets Sir Gawayne without
        obeisance.

          Sir Gawayn þe kny3t con mete.
        
2236

          He ne lutte hym no þyng lowe,
        
The other tells him that he is now ready for
        conversation

          Þat oþer sayde, "now, sir swete,
        

          Of steuen mon may þe trowe."
        



      XI.
    


"God preserve thee!" says the Green Knight,

          "Gawayn," quod þat grene gome, "God þe mot loke!
        
2240

          I-wysse þou art welcom,1 wy3e, to my place,
        
"as a true knight 'thou hast timed thy travel'

          & þou hat3 tymed þi trauayl as true2 mon
          schulde;
        
Thou knowest the covenant between us,

          & þou knowe3 þe couenaunte3 kest vus
          by-twene,
        

          At þis tyme twelmonyth þou toke þat þe falled,
        
that on New Year's day I should return thy blow
2244

          & I schulde at þis nwe 3ere 3eply þe quyte.
        
Here we are alone,

          & we ar in þis valay, verayly oure one,
        

          Here ar no renkes vs to rydde, rele as vus like3;
        
Have off thy helmet and take thy pay at once."

          Haf þy3 helme of þy hede, & haf here þy pay;
        
2248

          Busk no more debate þen I þe bede þenne,
        

          "When þou wypped of my hede at a wap one."
        
"By God," quoth Sir Gawayne, "I shall not
        begrudge thee thy will."

          "Nay, bi God," quod Gawayn, "þat me gost lante,
        

          I schal gruch þe no grwe, for grem þat falle3;
        
2252

          Botsty3tel þe vpon on strok, & I schal stonde stylle,
        

          & warp þe no wernyng, to worch as þe lyke3,
        

          no whare."
        
Then he shows his bare neck,

          He lened with þe nek, & lutte,
        
2256

          & schewed þat schyre al bare,
        

          & lette as he no3t dutte,
        
and appears undaunted.

          For drede he wolde not dare.
        


1 welcon, in MS. 2 truee in MS. 3
        MS. þy þy.
      


      XII.
    


Then the man in green seizes his grim tool.

          Then þe gome in þe grene grayþed hym swyþe,
        
2260

          Gedere3 yp hys grymme tole, Gawayn to smyte;
        
With all his force he raises it aloft.

          With alle þe bur in his body he ber hit on lofte,
        

          Munt as ma3tyly, as marre hym he wolde;
        

          Hade hit dryuen adoun, as dre3 as he atled,
        
2264

          Þer hade ben ded of his dynt, þat do3ty wat3 euer.
        

          Bot Gawayn on þat giserne glyfte hym bysyde,
        
As it came gliding down,

          As hit com glydande adoun, on glode hym to schende,
        
Sir Gawayne shrank a little with his shoulders.

          & schranke a lytel with þe schulderes, for þe scharp
          yrne.
        
2268

          Þat oþer schalk wyth a schunt þe schene wythhalde3,
        
The other reproved him, saying,

          & þenne repreued he þe prynce with mony
          prowde worde3:
        
"Thou art not Gawayne that is so good esteemed,

          "Þou art not Gawayn," quod þe gome, "þat is so
          goud halden,
        

          Þat neuer ar3ed for no here, by hylle ne be vale,
        
[Fol. 121b.]for thou fleest for fear
        before thou feelest harm. 2272

          & now þou fles for ferde, er þou fele harme3;
        

          Such cowardise of þat kny3t cowþe I neuer here.
        
I never flinched when thou struckest.

          Nawþer fyked I, ne fla3e, freke, quen þou myntest,
        

          Ne kest no kauelacion, in kynge3 hous Arthor,
        
My head flew to my foot, yet I never fled,
2276

          My hede fla3 to my fote, & 3et fla3 I neuer;
        

          & þou, er any harme hent, ar3e3 in hert,
        
wherefore I ought to be called the better man."

          Wherfore þe better burne me burde be called
        

          þer-fore."
        
"I shunted once," says Gawayne, "but will no
        more. 2280

          Quod G:, "I schunt one3,
        

          & so wyl I no more,
        

          Bot pa3 my hede falle on þe stone3,
        

          I con not hit restore.
        



      XIII.
    


Bring me to the point; deal me my destiny at
        once." 2284

          Bot busk, burne, bi þi fayth, & bryng me to þe poynt,
        

          Dele to me my destiné, & do hit out of honde,
        

          For I schal stonde þe a strok, & start no more,
        

          Til þyn ax haue me hitte, haf here my trawþe."
        
"Have at thee, then," says the other.
2288

          "Haf at þe þenne," quod þat oþer, &
          heue3 hit alofte,
        

          & wayte3 as wroþely, as he wode were;
        
With that he aims at him a blow.

          He mynte3 at hym ma3tyly, bot not þe mon ryue3,1


          With-helde heterly h[i]s honde, er hit hurt my3t.
        
Gawayne never flinches, but stands as still as a
        stone. 2292

          Gawayn grayþely hit byde3, & glent with no membre,
        

          Bot stode stylle as þe ston, oþer a stubbe auþer,
        

          Þat raþeled is in roche grounde, with
          rote3 a hundreth.
        

          Þen muryly efte con he mele, þe mon in þe grene,
        
"Now," says the Green Knight, "I must hit thee,
        since thy heart is whole." 2296

          "So now þou hat3 þi hert holle, hitte me bihou[e]s;
        

          Halde þe now þe hy3e hode, þat Arþur þe ra3t,
        

          & kepe þy kanel at þis kest, 3if hit keuer may."
        

          G: ful gryndelly with greme þenne sayde,
        
"Thrash on," says the other. 2300

          "Wy þresch on, þou þro mon, þou þrete3 to longe,
        

          I hope þat þi hert ar3e wyth þyn awen seluen."
        

          "For soþe," quod þat oþer freke, "so felly þou
          speke3,
        

          I wyl no lenger on lyte lette þin ernde,
        
2304

          ri3t nowe."
        
Then the Green Knight makes ready to strike.

          Þenne tas he2 hym stryþe to stryke,
        

          & frounses boþe lyppe & browe,
        

          No meruayle þa3 hym myslyke,
        
2308

          Þat hoped of no rescowe.
        


1 ? ryne3 = touches. 2 he he, in MS.
      


      XIV.
    


He let fall his loom on the bare

          He lyftes ly3tly his lome, & let hit doun fayre,
        
[Fol. 122.]neck of Sir Gawayne.

          With þe barbe of þe bitte bi þe bare nek
        

          Þa3 he homered heterly, hurt hym no more,
        
2312

          Bot snyrt hym on þat on syde, þat seuered þe hyde;
        
The sharp weapon pierced the flesh so that the
        blood flowed.

          Þe scharp schrank to þe flesche þur3 þe schyre grece,
        

          Þat þe schene blod over his schulderes schot to þe erþe.
        
When the knight saw the blood on the snow,

          & quen þe burne se3 þe blode blenk on þe snawe,
        
2316

          He sprit forth spenne fote more þen a spere lenþe,
        

          Hent heterly his helme, & on his hed cast,
        

          Schot with his schuldere3 his fayre schelde vnder,
        
he unsheathed his sword, and thus spake:

          Brayde3 out a bry3t sworde, & bremely he speke3;
        
2320

          Neuer syn þat he wat3 burne borne of his moder,
        

          Wat3 he neuer in þis worlde, wy3e half so blyþe:—
        
"Cease, man, of thy blow.

          "Blynne, burne, of þy bur, bede me no mo;
        

          I haf a stroke in þis sted with-oute stryf hent,
        
If thou givest me any more, readily shall I
        requite thee. 2324

          & if þow reche3 me any mo, I redyly schal quyte,
        

          & 3elde 3ederly a3ayn, & þer to 3e tryst,
        

          & foo;
        
Our agreement stipulates only one stroke."

          Bot on stroke here me falle3,
        
2328

          Þe couenaunt schop ry3t so,
        

          [Sikered]1 in Arþure3 halle3,
        

          & þer-fore, hende, now hoo!"
        


1 Illegible.
      


      XV.
    


The Green Knight rested on his axe,

          The haþel heldet hym fro, & on his ax rested,
        
2332

          Sette þe schaft vpon schore, & to be scharp lened,
        
looked on Sir Gawayne, who appeared bold and
        fearless,

          & loked to þe leude, þat on þe launde 3ede,
        

          How þat do3ty dredles deruely þer stonde3,
        

          Armed ful a3le3; in hert hit hym lyke3.
        
2336

          þenn he mele3 muryly, wyth a much steuen,
        
and addressed him as follows: "Bold knight, be
        not so wroth,

          & wyth a r[a]ykande rurde he to þe renk sayde,
        

          "Bolde burne, on þis bent be not so gryndel;
        

          No mon here vn-manerly þe mys-boden habbe,
        
2340

          Ne kyd, bot as couenaunde, at kynge3 kort schaped;
        
I promised thee a stroke and thou hast it, be
        satisfied.

          I hy3t þe a strok, & þou hit hat3, halde þe wel payed,
        

          I relece þe of þe remnaunt, of ry3tes alle oþer;
        

          3if1 I deliuer had bene, a boffet, paraunter,
        
I could have dealt worse with thee. 2344

          I couþe wroþeloker haf waret, [&] to þe haf wro3t anger.2


          Fyrst I mansed þe muryly, with a mynt one,
        
I menaced thee with one blow for the covenant

          & roue þe wyth no rof, sore with ry3t I þe profered,
        
[Fol. 122b.] between us on the first
        night.

          For þe forwarde that we fest in þe fyrst ny3t,
        
2348

          & þou trystyly þe trawþe & trwly me halde3,
        

          Al þe gayne þow me gef, as god mon shulde;
        
Another I aimed at thee because thou kissedst my
        wife.

          Þat oþer munt for þe morne, mon, I þe profered,
        

          Þou kyssedes my clere wyf, þe cosse3 me ra3te3,
        
2352

          For boþe two here I þe bede bot two bare myntes,
        

          boute scaþe;
        
A true man should restore truly, and then he need
        fear no harm.

          Trwe mon trwe restore,
        

          Þenne þar mon drede no waþe;
        
Thou failedst at the third time, and therefore
        take thee that tap. (See l. 1861.) 2356

          At þe þrid þou fayled þore,
        

          & þer-for þat tappe ta þe.
        


1 uf, in MS. 2 This word is doubtful.
      


      XVI.
    


For my weed (woven by my wife) thou wearest.

          For hit is my wede þat þou were3, þat ilke wouen girdel,
        

          Myn owen wyf hit þe weued, I wot wel forsoþe;
        
I know thy kisses and my wife's wooing.
2360

          Now know I wel þy cosses, & þy costes als,
        

          & þe wowyng of my wyf, I wro3t hit myseluen;
        
I sent her to try thee, and faultless I found
        thee.

          I sende hir to asay þe, & sothly me þynkke3,
        

          On þe fautlest freke, þat euer on fote 3ede;
        
2364

          As perle bi þe quite pese is of prys more,
        

          So is Gawayn, in god fayth, bi oþer gay kny3te3.
        
But yet thou sinnedst a little,

          Bot here you lakked a lyttel, sir, & lewte yow wonted,
        

          Bot þat wat3 for no wylyde werke, ne wowyng nauþer,
        
for love of thy life." 2368

          Bot for 3e lufed your lyf, þe lasse I yow blame."
        

          Þat oþer stif mon in study stod a gret whyle;
        

          So agreued for greme he gryed with-inne,
        
Gawayne stands confounded.

          Alle þe blode of his brest blende in his face,
        
2372

          Þat al he schrank for schome, þat þe schalk talked.
        

          Þe forme worde vpon folde, þat þe freke meled,—
        
"Cursed," he says, "be cowardice and covetousness
        both!"

          "Corsed worth cowarddyse & couetyse boþe!
        

          In yow is vylany & vyse, þat vertue disstrye3."
        
Then he takes off the girdle and throws it to the
        knight. 2376

          Þenne he ka3t to þe knot, & þe kest lawse3,
        

          Brayde broþely þe belt to þe burne seluen:
        

          "Lo! þer þe falssyng, foule mot hit falle!
        
He curses his cowardice,

          For care of þy knokke cowardyse me ta3t
        
2380

          To a-corde me with couetyse, my kynde to for-sake,
        

          Þat is larges & lewte, þat longe3 to kny3te3.
        
and confesses himself to have been guilty of
        untruth.

          Now am I fawty, & falce, & ferde haf ben euer;
        

          Of trecherye & vn-trawþe boþe bityde sor3e
        
2384

          & care!
        
[Fol. 123.]

          I bi-knowe yow, kny3t, here stylle,
        

          Al fawty is my fare,
        

          Lete3 me ouer-take your wylle,
        
2388

          & efle I schal be ware."
        



      XVII.
    


Then the other, laughing, thus spoke:

          Thenne lo3e þat oþer leude, & luflyly sayde,
        

          "I halde hit hardily1 hole, þe harme þat I hade;
        
"Thou art confessed so clean,

          Þou art confessed so clene, be-knowen of þy mysses,
        
2392

          & hat3 þe penaunce apert, of þe poynt of myn egge,
        
that I hold thee as pure as if thou hadst never
        been guilty.

          I halde þe polysed of þat ply3t, & pured as clene,
        

          As þou hade3 neuer forfeted, syþen þou
          wat3 fyrst borne.
        
I give thee, sir, the gold-hemmed girdle,

          & I gif þe, sir, þe gurdel þat is golde hemmed;
        
2396

          For hit is grene as my goune, sir G:, 3e maye
        

          Þenk vpon þis ilke þrepe, þer þou forth þrynge3
        

          Among prynces of prys, & þis a pure token
        
as a token of thy adventure at the Green Chapel.

          Of þe chaunce of þe grene chapel, at cheualrous kny3te3;
        
Come again to my abode, and abide there for the
        remainder of the festival." 2400

          & 3e schal in þis nwe 3er a3ayn to my wone3,
        

          & we schyn reuel þe remnaunt of þis ryche fest,
        

          ful bene."
        

          Þer laþed hym fast þe lorde,
        
2404

          & sayde, "with my wyf, I wene,
        

          We schal yow wel acorde,
        

          Þat wat3 your enmy kene."
        


1 hardilyly, in MS.
      


      XVIII.
    


"Nay, forsooth," says Gawayne,

          "Nay, for soþe," quod þe segge, & sesed hys helme,
        
2408

          & hat3 hit of hendely, & þe haþel þonkke3,
        
"I have sojourned sadly, but bliss betide thee!

          "I haf soiorned sadly, sele yow bytyde,
        

          & he 3elde hit yow 3are, þat 3arkke3 al menskes!
        
Commend me to your comely wife and that other
        lady who have beguiled me.

          & comaunde3 me to þat cortays, your comlych fere,
        
2412

          Boþe þat on & þat oþer, myn honoured ladye3.
        

          Þat þus hor kny3t wyth hor kest han koyntly bigyled.
        
But it is no marvel for a man to be brought to
        grief through a woman's wiles.

          Bot hit is no ferly, þa3 a fole madde,
        

          & þur3 wyles of wymmen be wonen to sor3e;
        
Adam, Solomon, Samson, and David were beguiled by
        women. 2416

          For so wat3 Adam in erde with one bygyled,
        

          & Salamon with fele sere, & Samson eft sone3,
        

          Dalyda dalt hym hys wyrde, & Dauyth þer-after


          Wat3 blended with Barsabe, þat much bale þoled.
        
How could a man love them and believe them not?
2420

          Now þese were wrathed wyth her wyles, hit were a wynne
          huge,
        

          To luf hom wel, & leue hem not, a leude þat couþe,
        
[Fol. 123b.]

          For þes wer forne1 þe freest þat fol3ed alle þe sele,
        

          Ex-ellently of alle þyse oþer, vnder heuen-ryche,
        
2424

          þat mused;
        

          & alle þay were bi-wyled,
        

          With2 wymmen þat þay vsed,
        
Though I be now beguiled, methinks I should be
        excused.

          Þa3 I be now bigyled,
        
2428

          Me þink me burde be excused."
        


1 forme (?) 2 with wyth, in MS.
      


      XIX.
    


But God reward you for your girdle.

          "Bot your gordel," quod G: "God yow for-3elde!
        

          Þat wyl I welde wyth good wylle, not for þe wynne golde,
        

          Ne þe saynt, ne þe sylk, ne þe syde pendaundes,
        
2432

          For wele, ne for worchyp, ne for þe wlonk werkke3,
        
I will wear it in remembrance of my fault.

          Bot in syngne of my surfet I schal se hit ofte;
        

          When I ride in renoun, remorde to myseluen
        

          Þe faut & þe fayntyse of þe flesche crabbed,
        
2436

          How tender hit is to entyse teches of fylþe;
        
And when pride shall prick me,

          & þus, quen pryde schal me pryk, for prowes of armes,
        
a look to this lace shall abate it.

          Þe loke to þis luf lace schal leþe my hert.
        

          Bot on I wolde yow pray, displeses yow neuer;
        
2440

          Syn 3e be lorde of þe 3onde[r] londe, þer I haf lent inne,
        

          Wyth yow wyth worschyp,—þe wy3e hit yow 3elde
        

          Þat vp-halde3 þe heuen, & on hy3 sitte3,—
        
But tell me your right name and I shall have
        done."

          How norne 3e yowre ry3t nome, & þenne no more?"
        
2444

          "Þat schal I telle þe trwly," quod þat oþer þenne,
        
The Green Knight replies, "I am called Bernlak de
        Hautdesert, through might of Morgain la Fey, the pupil of Merlin.

          "Bernlak de Hautdesert I hat in þis londe,
        

          Þur3 my3t of Morgne la Faye, þat in my hous lenges,
        

          &1 koyntyse of clergye, bi craftes wel lerned,
        
2448

          Þe maystres of Merlyn, mony ho2 taken;
        

          For ho hat3 dalt drwry ful dere sum tyme,
        

          With þat conable klerk, þat knowes alle your kny3te3
        

          at hame;
        
2452

          Morgne þe goddes,
        

          Þer-fore hit is hir name;
        
She can tame even the haughtiest.

          Welde3 non so hy3e hawtesse,
        

          Þat ho ne con make ful tame.
        


1 in (?). 2 ho hat3 (?).
      


      XX.
    


It was she who caused me to test the renown of
        the Round Table, 2456

          Ho wayned me vpon þis wyse to your wynne halle,
        

          For to assay þe surquidre, 3if hit soth were,
        

          Þat rennes of þe grete renoun of þe Rounde Table;
        

          Ho wayned me þis wonder, your wytte3 to reue,
        
[Fol. 124.]hoping to grieve Guenever and
        cause her death through fear. 2460

          For to haf greued Gaynour, & gart hir to dy3e.
        

          With gopnyng1 of þat ilke gomen, þat
          gostlych speked,
        

          With his hede in his honde, bifore þe hy3e table.
        

          Þat is ho þat is at home, þe auncian lady;
        
She is even thine aunt. 2464

          Ho is euen þyn aunt, Arþure3 half suster,
        

          Þe duches do3ter of Tyntagelle, þat dere Vter after

Therefore come to her and make merry in my
        house."

          Hade Arþur vpon, þat aþel is nowþe.
        

          Þerfore I eþe þe, haþel, to com to þy naunt,
        
2468

          Make myry in my hous, my meny þe louies,
        

          & I wol þe as wel, wy3e, bi my faythe,
        

          As any gome vnder God, for þy grete trauþe."
        
Gawayne refuses to return with the Green Knight.

          & he nikked hym naye, he nolde bi no wayes;
        
2472

          Þay acolen & kyssen, [bikennen] ayþer oþer


          To þe prynce of paradise, & parten ry3t þere,
        

          on coolde;
        
On horse full fair he bends to Arthur's hall.

          Gawayn on blonk ful bene,
        
2476

          To þe kynge3 bur3 buske3 bolde,
        

          & þe kny3t in þe enker grene,
        

          Whider-warde so euer he wolde.
        


1 glopnyng (?).
      


      XXI.
    


Wild ways now Gawayne rides.

          Wylde waye3 in þe worlde Wowen now ryde3,
        
2480

          On Gryngolet, þat þe grace hade geten of his lyue;
        
Oft he harboured in house and oft thereout.

          Ofte he herbered in house, & ofte al þeroute,
        

          & mony a-venture in vale, & venquyst ofte,
        

          Þat I ne ty3t, at þis tyme, in tale to remene.
        
The wound in his neck became whole. 2484

          Þe hurt wat3 hole, þat he hade hent in his nek,
        
He still carried about him the belt,

          & þe blykkande belt he bere þeraboute,
        

          A belef as a bauderyk, bounden bi his syde,
        

          Loken vnder his lyfte arme, þe lace, with a knot,
        
in token of his fault. 2488

          In tokenyng he wat3 tane in tech of a faute;
        
Thus he comes to the Court of King Arthur.

          & þus he commes to þe court, kny3t al in
          sounde.
        
Great then was the joy of all.

          Þer wakned wele in þat wone, when wyst þe grete,
        

          Þat gode G: wat3 commen, gayn hit hym þo3t;
        
The king and his knights ask him concerning his
        journey. 2492

          Þe kyng kysse3 þe kny3t, & þe whene alce,
        

          & syþen mony syker kny3t, þat so3t hym to haylce,
        
Gawayne tells them of his adventures,

          Of his fare þat hym frayned, & ferlyly he telles;
        

          Biknowo3 alle þe costes of care þat he hade,—
        
2496

          Þe chaunce of þe chapel, þe chere of þe kny3t,
        
[Fol. 124b.]the love of the lady, and
        lastly of the lace.

          Þe luf of þe ladi, þe lace at þe last.
        

          Þe nirt in þe nek he naked hem schewed,
        
He showed them the cut in his neck.

          Þat he la3t for his vnleute at þe leudes hondes,
        
2500

          for blame;
        

          He tened quen he schulde telle,
        
He groaned for grief and shame, and the blood
        rushed into his face.

          He groned for gref & grame;
        

          Þe blod in his face con melle,
        
2504

          When he hit schulde schewe, for schame.
        



      XXII.
    


"Lo!" says he, handling the lace, "this is the
        band of blame,

          "Lo! lorde," quod þe leude, & þe lace hondeled,
        

          "Þis is þe bende of þis blame I bere [in] my nek,
        

          Þis is þe laþe & þe losse, þat I la3t haue,
        
a token of my cowardice and covetousness,
2508

          Of couardise & couetyse, þat I haf ca3t þare,
        

          Þis is þe token of vn-trawþe, þat I am tan inne,
        
I must needs wear it as long as I live."

          & I mot nede3 hit were, wyle I may last;
        

          For non may hyden his harme, bot vnhap ne may hit,
        
2512

          For þer hit one3 is tachched, twynne wil hit neuer."
        
The king comforts the knight, and all the court
        too.

          Þe kyng comforte3 þe kny3t, & alle þe court als,
        

          La3en loude þer-at, & luflyly acorden,
        

          Þat lordes & ladis, þat longed to þe Table,
        
Each knight of the brotherhood agrees to wear a
        bright green belt, 2516

          Vche burne of þe broþer-hede a bauderyk schulde haue,
        

          A bende, a belef hym aboute, of a bry3t grene,
        
for Gawayne's sake,

          & þat, for sake of þat segge, in swete to were.
        

          For þat wat3 acorded þe renoun of þe Rounde Table,
        
who ever more honoured it. 2520

          & he honoured þat hit hade, euer-more after,
        

          As hit is breued in þe best boke of romaunce.
        
Thus in Arthur's day this adventure befell.

          Þus in Arthurus day þis aunter
          bitidde,
        

          Þe Brutus bokees þer-of beres wyttenesse;
        
2524

          Syþen Brutus, þe bolde burne, bo3ed hider fyrst,
        

          After þe segge & þe asaute wat3 sesed at Troye,
        

          I-wysse;
        

          Mony auntere3 here bi-forne,
        
2528

          Haf fallen suche er þis:
        
He that bore the crown of thorns bring us to His
        bliss!

          Now þat bere þe croun of þorne,
        

          He bryng vus to his blysse! AMEN.
        




      NOTES.
    



          Line 8
        

              Ricchis turns, goes,     The
          king ...   Ricchis his reynys and the Renke
          metys:   Girden to gedur with þere grete speires.—T.B.
          l. 1232.
        



          37
        

    Þis kyng lay at Camylot vpon kryst-masse.
Camalot, in Malory's "Morte Arthure," is said to be the same as
          Winchester. Ritson supposes it to be Caer-went, in
          Monmouthshire, and afterwards confounded with Caer-wynt, or Winchester.
          But popular tradition here seems the best guide, which assigned the
          site of Camalot to the ruins of a castle on a hill, near the church of
          South Cadbury, in Somersetshire (Sir F. Madden).
        



          65
        

    Nowel nayted o-newe, neuened ful ofte.
            Christmas celebrated anew, mentioned full often. Sir
          F. Madden leaves the word nayted unexplained in his Glossary to
          "Syr Gawayne."
        



          124
        

syluener = sylueren, i.e. silver dishes.
        



          139
        

lyndes = lendes, loins.
        



          142
        

in his muckel, in his greatness.
        



          184
        

          Wat3 euesed al umbe-torne—? was trimmed, all cut evenly around;
          umbe-torne may be an error for vmbe-corue = cut round.
        



          216
        

in gracios werkes. Sir F. Madden reads gracons for gracios,
          and suggests Greek as the meaning of it.
        



          244-5
        

    As al were slypped vpon slepe so slaked hor
          lote3         in hy3e.
              As all were fallen asleep so ceased their
          words         in haste
          (suddenly). Sir F. Madden reads slaked horlote3, instead
          of slaked hor lote3, which, according to his glossary,
          signifies drunken vagabonds. He evidently takes horlote3 to be
          another (and a very uncommon) form of harlote3 = harlots.
          But harlot, or vagabond, would be a very inappropriate term to
          apply to the noble Knights of the Round Table. Moreover, slaked
          never, I think, means drunken. The general sense of the verb slake
          is to let loose, lessen, cease. Cf. lines 411-2, where sloke,
          another form of slake, occurs with a similar meaning:
              — layt no fyrre; bot slokes.
              — seek no further, but stop (cease).
          Sir F. Madden suggests blows as the explanation of slokes.
          It is, however, a verb in the imperative mood.
        



          286
        

Brayn. Mätzner suggests brayn-wod.
        



          296
        

barlay = par loi. This word is exceedingly common in the T.
          Book (see l. 3391).     I bid you now,
          barlay, with besines at all     Þat ye
          set you most soverainly my suster to gete.—T.B. l. 2780.
        



          394
        

siker. Sir F. Madden reads swer.
        



          440
        

bluk. Sir F. Madden suggests blunk (horse). I am
          inclined to keep to the reading of the MS., and explain bluk as
          = bulk = trunk. Cf. the use of the word Blok in "Early
          English Alliterative Poems," p. 100, l. 272.
        



          558
        

derue doel, etc. = great grief. Sir F. Madden reads derne,
          i.e. secret, instead of derue (= derf). Cf. line 564.
        



          577
        

knaged, fastened.     The braunches
          were borly, sum of bright gold,     With
          leuys full luffly, light of the same;     With
          burions aboue bright to beholde;     And
          fruit on yt fourmyt of fairest of shap,     Of
          mony kynd that was knyt, knagged aboue.—T.B. l. 4973.
        



          629
        

              & ay quere hit is endele3, etc.
              And everywhere it is endless, etc.
          Sir F. Madden reads emdele3, i.e. with equal sides.
        



          652
        

for-be = for-bi = surpassing, beyond.
        



          681
        

          for Hadet read Halet = haled = exiled (?). See
          line 1049.
        



          806
        

auinant = auenaunt, pleasantly. Sir F. Madden reads amnant.
        



          954
        

of. Should we not read on (?).
        



          957
        

    Þat oþer wyth a gorger wat3 gered ouer þe
          swyre. The gorger or wimple is stated first to
          have appeared in Edward the First's reign, and an example is found on
          the monument of Aveline, Countess of Lancaster, who died in 1269. From
          the poem, however, it would seem that the gorger was confined
          to elderly ladies (Sir F. Madden)
        



          968
        

              More lykker-wys on to lyk,     Wat3
          þat scho had on lode.     A more pleasant
          one to like,     Was that (one) she had under
          her control.
        



          988
        

tayt = lively, and hence pleasant, agreeable.
        



          1015
        

in vayres, in purity.
        



          1020
        

dut = dunt (?) = dint (?), referring to sword-sports.
        



          1022
        

sayn[t] Ione3 day. This is the 27th of December, and the last
          of the feast. Sometimes the Christmas festivities were prolonged to
          New Year's Day (Sir F. Madden).
        



          1047
        

derne dede = secret deed. I would prefer to read derue dede
          = great deed. Cf. lines 558, 564.
        



          1053
        

I wot in worlde, etc. = I not (I know not) in worlde,
          etc.
        



          1054
        

              I nolde, bot if I hit negh my3t on nw3eres
          morne,     For alle þe londe in-wyth
          Logres, etc. I would not [delay to set out], unless I might
          approach it on New Year's morn, for all the lands within England, etc.
        



          1074
        

in spenne = in space = in the interval = meanwhile. See
          line 1503.
        



          1160
        

slentyng of arwes. Sir F. Madden reads sleutyng.
              "Of drawyn swordis sclentyng to and
          fra,     The brycht mettale, and othir
          armouris seir,     Quharon the sonnys blenkis
          betis cleir,     Glitteris and schane, and
          vnder bemys brycht,     Castis ane new
          twynklyng or a lemand lycht."         (G.
          Douglas' Æneid, Vol. i, p. 421.)
        



          1281
        

let lyk = appeared pleased.
        



          1283
        

              Þa3 I were burde bry3test, þe burde in
          mynde hade, etc. The sense requires us to read:     Þa3
          ho were burde bry3test, þe burne in mynde hade, etc. i.e.,
          Though she were lady fairest, the knight in mind had, etc.
        



          1440
        

              Long sythen [seuered] for þe sounder þat
          wi3t for-olde Long since separated from the sounder or
          herd that fierce (one) for-aged (grew very old).     "Now
          to speke of the boore, the fyrste year he is     A
          pygge of the sounder callyd, as haue I blys;     The
          secounde yere an hogge, and soo shall he be,     And
          an hoggestere, whan he is of yeres thre;     And
          when he is foure yere, a boor shall he be,     From
          the sounder of the swyne thenne departyth he;     A
          synguler is he soo, for alone he woll go."         (Book
          of St. Alban's, ed. 1496, sig. d., i.)
        



          1476
        

totes = looks, toots.     Sho went up
          wightly by a walle syde.     To the toppe of
          a toure and tot ouer the water.—T.B. l. 862.




          1623
        

          A verb [? lalede = cried] seems wanting after lorde.
        



          1702
        

fnasted, breathed.     These balfull
          bestes were, as the boke tellus,     Full
          flaumond of fyre with fnastyng of logh.—T.B. l. 168.
        



          1710
        

a strothe rande = a rugged path. Cf. the phrases tene greue,
          l. 1707; ro3e greue, l. 1898.
        



          1729
        

bi lag = be-lagh(?) = below (?).
        



          1719
        

              Thenne wat3 hit lif vpon list, etc.
          Should we not read:     Thenne wat3 hit
          list vpon lif, etc. i.e., Then was there joy in life, etc.
        



          1780
        

lyf = lef(?), beloved (one).
        



          1869
        

              Ho hat3 kyst þe kny3t so to3t.
            She has kissed the knight so courteous. Sir F.
          Madden explains to3t, promptly. To3t seems to be the
          same as the Northumbrian taght in the following extract from
          the "Morte Arthure":     "There come in at
          the fyrste course, before the kyng seluene,     Bare
          hevedys that ware bryghte, burnyste with sylver,     Alle
          with taghte mene and towne in togers fulle ryche."—(p. 15.)
          The word towne (well-behaved) still exists in wan-ton,
          the original meaning of which was ill-mannered, ill-bred.
        



          1909
        

bray hounde3 = braþ hounde3, i.e. fierce hounds.
        



          1995
        

He hat3 nere þat he so3t = He wat3 nere þat he so3t = He
          was near to that which he sought.
        



          2160
        

gedere3 þe rake = takes the path or way.
        



          2167
        

              Þe skwe3 of þe scowtes skayued hym þo3t.
          The shadows of the hills appeared wild (desolate) to him. Sir F.
          Madden reads skayned, of which he gives no explanation. Skayued
          = skayfed, seems to be the N. Prov. English scafe, wild.
          Scotch schaivie, wild, mad. O.N. skeifr. Sw. skef,
          awry, distorted.
        



          2204
        

ronge = clattered.
        



          2211
        

              Drede dot3 me no lote =     No
          noise shall cause me to dread (fear).
        



          2357
        

              & þer-for þat tappe ta þe.
              And therefore take thee that tap. ta
          þe = take thee. Sir F. Madden reads taþe = taketh. See l. 413,
          where to þe rhymes with sothe. We have no imperatives in
          th in this poem.
        



          2401
        

We schyn reuel, etc. Sir F. Madden reads wasch yn reuel.
          But schyn = shall. See Glossary to "Alliterative Poems."
        



          2474
        

on-coolde = on-colde = coldly = sorrowfully.
        



          2489    
        

in-sounde = soundly, well. Cf. in-blande = together; in-lyche,
          alike; inmydde3, amidst.
        



 


      Sir Gawayne
    

      and
    

      The Green Knight:
    

      AN ALLITERATIVE ROMANCE-POEM,
    

      (AB. 1360 A.D.)
    

      BY THE AUTHOR OF
    

      "EARLY ENGLISH ALLITERATIVE POEMS."
    

      RE-EDITED FROM COTTON. MS. NERO, A.x., IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
    

      BY
    

      RICHARD MORRIS,
    

      EDITOR OF HAMPOLE'S "PRICKE OF CONSCIENCE," "EARLY ENGLISH ALLITERATIVE
      POEMS," ETC.;
    

      MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF THE PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY.
    

      SECOND EDITION, REVISED, 1869.
    

      LONDON
    

      PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY
    

      BY N. TRÜBNER & CO., 60, PATERNOSTER ROW,
    

      MDCCCLXIV.
    


      JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.
    


      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
    

      In re-editing the present romance-poem I have been saved all labour of
      transcription by using the very accurate text contained in Sir F. Madden's
      "Syr Gawayne."
    

      I have not only read his copy with the manuscript, but also the
      proof-sheets as they came to hand, hoping by this means to give the reader
      a text free from any errors of transcription.
    

      The present edition differs from that of the earlier one in having the
      contractions of the manuscript expanded and side-notes added to the text
      to enable the reader to follow with some degree of ease the author's
      pleasant narrative of Sir Gawayne's adventures.
    

      The Glossary is taken from Sir F. Madden's "Syr Gawayne,"1 to
      which, for the better interpretation of the text, I have made several
      additions, and have, moreover, glossed nearly all the words previously
      left unexplained.
    

      For a description of the Manuscript, and particulars relating to the
      authorship and dialect of the present work, the reader is referred to the
      preface to Early English Alliterative Poems.
    

      R.M.
    



          LONDON,
        

December 22, 1864.
        



      [1 Sir F. Madden has most generously placed at the disposal of
      the Early English Text Society any of his works which it may determine to
      re-edit.]
    


      INTRODUCTION.
    

      No Knight of the Round Table has been so highly honoured by the old
      Romance-writers as Sir Gawayne, the son of Loth, and nephew to the
      renowned Arthur. They delighted to describe him as Gawayne the good, a man
      matchless on mould, the most gracious that under God lived, the hardiest
      of hand, the most fortunate in arms, and the most polite in hall, whose
      knowledge, knighthood, kindly works, doings, doughtiness, and deeds of
      arms were known in all lands.
    

      When Arthur beheld the dead body of his kinsman lying on the ground bathed
      in blood, he is said to have exclaimed, "O righteous God, this blood were
      worthy to be preserved and enshrined in gold!" Our author, too, loves to
      speak of his hero in similar terms of praise, calling him the knight
      faultless in his five wits, void of every offence, and adorned with every
      earthly virtue. He represents him as one whose trust was in the five
      wounds, and in whom the five virtues which distinguished the true knight
      were more firmly established than in any other on earth.
    

      The author of the present story, who, as we know from his religious poems,
      had an utter horror of moral impurity, could have chosen no better subject
      for a romance in which amusement and moral instruction were to be
      combined. In the following tale he shows how the true knight, though
      tempted sorely not once alone, but twice, nay thrice, breaks not his vow
      of chastity, but turns aside the tempter's shafts with the shield of
      purity and arm of faith, and so passes scatheless through the perilous
      defile of trial and opportunity seeming safe.
    

      But while our author has borrowed many of the details of his story from
      the "Roman de Perceval" by Chrestien de Troyes, he has made the narrative
      more attractive by the introduction of several original and highly
      interesting passages which throw light on the manners and amusements of
      our ancestors.
    

      The following elaborate descriptions are well deserving of especial
      notice:—
    


        I. The mode of completely arming a knight (ll. 568-589).
      



        II. The hunting and breaking the deer (ll. 1126-1359).
      



        III. The hunting and unlacing the wild boar (ll. 1412-1614).
      



        IV. A fox hunt (ll. 1675-1921).
      


      The following is an outline of the story of Gawayne's adventures, more or
      less in the words of the writer himself:—
    


        Arthur, the greatest of Britain's kings, holds the Christmas festival at
        Camelot, surrounded by the celebrated knights of the Round Table, noble
        lords, the most renowned under heaven, and ladies the loveliest that
        ever had life (ll. 37-57). This noble company celebrate the New Year by
        a religious service, by the bestowal of gifts, and the most joyous
        mirth. Lords and ladies take their seats at the table—Queen
        Guenever, the grey-eyed, gaily dressed, sits at the daïs, the high
        table, or table of state, where too sat Gawayne and Ywain together with
        other worthies of the Round Table (ll. 58-84, 107-115). Arthur, in mood
        as joyful as a child, his blood young and his brain wild, declares that
        he will not eat nor sit long at the table until some adventurous thing,
        some uncouth tale, some great marvel, or some encounter of arms has
        occurred to mark the return of the New Year (ll. 85-106).
      



        The first course was announced with cracking of trumpets, with the noise
        of nakers and noble pipes.
      




          "Each two had dishes twelve,
        

          Good beer and bright wine both."
        




        Scarcely was the first course served when another noise than that of
        music was heard. There rushes in at the hall-door a knight of gigantic
        stature—the greatest on earth—in measure high. He was
        clothed entirely in green, and rode upon a green foal (ll. 116-178).
        Fair wavy hair fell about the shoulders of the Green Knight, and a great
        beard like a bush hung upon his breast (ll. 179-202).
      



        The knight carried no helmet, shield, or spear, but in one hand a holly
        bough, and in the other an axe "huge and unmeet," the edge of which was
        as keen as a sharp razor (ll. 203-220). Thus arrayed, the Green Knight
        enters the hall without saluting any one. The first word that he uttered
        was, "Where is the govenour of this gang? gladly would I see him and
        with himself speak reason." To the knights he cast his eye, looking for
        the most renowned. Much did the noble assembly marvel to see a man and a
        horse of such a hue, green as the grass. Even greener they seemed than
        green enamel on bright gold. Many marvels had they seen, but none such
        as this. They were afraid to answer, but sat stone-still in a dead
        silence, as if overpowered by sleep;
      




          "Not all from fear, but some for courtesy" (ll. 221-249).
        




        Then Arthur before the high daïs salutes the Green Knight, bids him
        welcome, and entreats him to stay awhile at his Court. The knight says
        that his errand is not to abide in any dwelling, but to seek the most
        valiant of the heroes of the Round Table that he may put his courage to
        the proof, and thus satisfy himself as to the fame of Arthur's court. "I
        come," he says, "in peace, as ye may see by this branch that I bear
        here. Had I come with hostile intentions, I should not have left my
        hauberk, helmet, shield, sharp spear, and other weapons behind me. But
        because I desire no war, 'my weeds are softer.' If thou be so bold as
        all men say, thou wilt grant me the request I am about to make." "Sir
        courteous knight," replies Arthur, "if thou cravest battle only, here
        failest thou not to fight." "Nay," says the Green Knight, "I seek no
        fighting. Here about on this bench are only beardless children. Were I
        arrayed in arms on a high steed no man here would be a match for me (ll.
        250-282). But it is now Christmas time, and this is the New Year, and I
        see around me many brave ones;—if any be so bold in his blood that
        dare strike a stroke for another, I shall give him this rich axe to do
        with it whatever he pleases. I shall abide the first blow just as I sit,
        and will stand him a stroke, stiff on this floor, provided that I deal
        him another in return.
      




          And yet give I him respite,
        

          A twelvemonth and a day;
        

          Now haste and let see tite (soon)
        

          Dare any here-in ought say.'"
        




        If he astounded them at first, much more so did he after this speech,
        and fear held them all silent. The knight, righting himself in his
        saddle, rolls fiercely his red eyes about, bends his bristly green
        brows, and strokes his beard awaiting a reply. But finding none that
        would carp with him, he exclaims, "What! is this Arthur's house, the
        fame of which has spread through so many realms? Forsooth, the renown of
        the Round Table is overturned by the word of one man's speech, for all
        tremble for dread without a blow being struck!" (ll. 283-313). With this
        he laughed so loud that Arthur blushed for very shame, and waxed as
        wroth as the wind. "I know no man," he says, "that is aghast at thy
        great words. Give me now thy axe and I will grant thee thy request!"
        Arthur seizes the axe, grasps the handle, and sternly brandishes it
        about, while the Green Knight, with a stern cheer and a dry countenance,
        stroking his beard and drawing down his coat, awaits the blow (ll.
        314-335). Sir Gawayne, the nephew of the king, beseeches his uncle to
        let him undertake the encounter; and, at the earnest entreaty of his
        nobles, Arthur consents "to give Gawayne the game" (ll. 336-365).
      



        Sir Gawayne then takes possession of the axe, but, before the blow is
        dealt, the Green Knight asks the name of his opponent. "In good faith,"
        answers the good knight, "Gawayne I am called, that bids thee to this
        buffet, whatever may befall after, and at this time twelvemonth will
        take from thee another, with whatever weapon thou wilt, and with no
        wight else alive." "By Gog," quoth the Green Knight, "it pleases me well
        that I shall receive at thy fist that which I have sought here—moreover
        thou hast truly rehearsed the terms of the covenant,—but thou
        shalt first pledge me thy word that thou wilt seek me thyself,
        wheresoever on earth thou believest I may be found, and fetch thee such
        wages as thou dealest me to-day before this company of doughty ones."
        "Where should I seek thee?" replies Gawayne, "where is thy place? I know
        not thee, thy court, or thy name. I wot not where thou dwellest, but
        teach me thereto, tell me how thou art called, and I shall endeavour to
        find thee,—and that I swear thee for truth and by my sure troth."
        "That is enough in New Year," says the groom in green, "if I tell thee
        when I have received the tap. When thou hast smitten me, then smartly I
        will teach thee of my house, my home, and my own name, so that thou
        mayest follow my track and fulfil the covenant between us. If I spend no
        speech, then speedest thou the better, for then mayest thou remain in
        thy own land and seek no further; but cease thy talking1 (ll.
        366-412). Take now thy grim tool to thee and let us see how thou
        knockest." "Gladly, sir, for sooth," quoth Gawayne, and his axe he
        brandishes.
      



        [1 This, I think, is the true explanation of slokes.]
      



        The Green Knight adjusts himself on the ground, bends slightly his head,
        lays his long lovely locks over his crown, and lays bare his neck for
        the blow. Gawayne then gripped the axe, and, raising it on high, let it
        fall quickly upon the knight's neck and severed the head from the body.
        The fair head fell from the neck to the earth, and many turned it aside
        with their feet as it rolled forth. The blood burst from the body, yet
        the knight never faltered nor fell; but boldly he started forth on stiff
        shanks and fiercely rushed forward, seized his head, and lifted it up
        quickly. Then he runs to his horse, the bridle he catches, steps into
        his stirrups and strides aloft. His head by the hair he holds in his
        hands, and sits as firmly in his saddle as if no mishap had ailed him,
        though headless he was (ll. 413-439). He turned his ugly trunk about—that
        ugly body that bled,—and holding the head in his hand, he directed
        the face toward the "dearest on the dais." The head lifted up its
        eyelids and looked abroad, and thus much spoke with its mouth as ye may
        now hear:
      



        "Loke, Gawayne, thou be prompt to go as thou hast promised, and seek
        till thou find me according to thy promise made in the hearing of these
        knights. Get thee to the Green Chapel, I charge thee, to fetch such a
        dint as thou hast dealt, to be returned on New Year's morn. As the
        Knight of the Green Chapel I am known to many, wherefore if thou seekest
        thou canst not fail to find me. Therefore come, or recreant be called."
        With a fierce start the reins he turns, rushes out of the hall-door, his
        head in his hand, so that the fire of the flint flew from the hoofs of
        his foal. To what kingdom he belonged knew none there, nor knew they
        from whence he had come. What then?
      




          "The king and Gawayne there
        

          At that green (one) they laugh and grin."
        




        Though Arthur wondered much at the marvel, he let no one see that he was
        at all troubled about it, but full loudly thus spake to his comely queen
        with courteous speech:
      



        "Dear dame, to-day be never dismayed, well happens such craft at
        Christmas time. I may now proceed to meat, for I cannot deny that I have
        witnessed a wondrous adventure this day" (ll. 440-475).
      



        He looked upon Sir Gawayne and said, "Now, sir, hang up thine axe, for
        enough has it hewn." So the weapon was hung up on high that all might
        look upon it, and "by true title thereof tell the wonder." Then all the
        knights hastened to their seats at the table, so did the king and our
        good knight, and they were there served with all dainties, "with all
        manner of meat and minstrelsy."
      



        Though words were wanting when they first to seat went, now are their
        hands full of stern work, and the marvel affords them good subject for
        conversation. But a year passes full quickly and never returns,—the
        beginning is seldom like the end; wherefore this Christmas passed away
        and the year after, and each season in turn followed after another (ll.
        476-520). Thus winter winds round again, and then Gawayne thinks of his
        wearisome journey (ll. 521-535). On All-hallows day Arthur entertains
        right nobly the lords and ladies of his court in honour of his nephew,
        for whom all courteous knights and lovely ladies were in great grief.
        Nevertheless they spoke only of mirth, and, though joyless themselves,
        made many a joke to cheer the good Sir Gawayne (ll. 536-565). Early on
        the morrow Sir Gawayne, with great ceremony, is arrayed in his armour
        (ll. 566-589), and thus completely equipped for his adventure he first
        hears mass, and afterwards takes leave of Arthur, the knights of the
        Round Table, and the lords and ladies of the court, who kiss him and
        commend him to Christ. He bids them all good day, as he thought, for
        evermore (ll. 590-669);
      




          "Very much was the warm water that poured from eyes that day."
        




        Now rides our knight through the realms of England with no companion but
        his foal, and no one to hold converse with save God alone. From Camelot,
        in Somersetshire, he proceeds through Gloucestershire and the adjoining
        counties into Montgomeryshire, and thence through North Wales to
        Holyhead, adjoining the Isle of Anglesea (ll. 670-700), from which he
        passes into the very narrow peninsula of Wirral, in Cheshire, where
        dwelt but few that loved God or man. Gawayne enquires after the Green
        Knight of the Green Chapel, but all the inhabitants declare that they
        have never seen "any man of such hues of green."
      



        The knight thence pursues his journey by strange paths, over hill and
        moor, encountering on his way not only serpents, wolves, bulls, bears,
        and boars, but wood satyrs and giants. But worse than all those,
        however, was the sharp winter, "when the cold clear water shed from the
        clouds, and froze ere it might fall to the earth. Nearly slain with the
        sleet he slept in his armour, more nights than enough, in naked rocks"
        (ll. 701-729).
      



        Thus in peril and plight the knight travels on until Christmas-eve, and
        to Mary he makes his moan that she may direct him to some abode. On the
        morn he arrives at an immense forest, wondrously wild, surrounded by
        high hills on every side, where he found hoary oaks full huge, a hundred
        together. The hazel and the hawthorn intermingled were all overgrown
        with moss, and upon their boughs sat many sad birds that piteously piped
        for pain of the cold. Gawayne besought the Lord and Mary to guide him to
        some habitation where he might hear mass (ll. 730-762). Scarcely had he
        crossed himself thrice, when he perceived a dwelling in the wood set
        upon a hill. It was the loveliest castle he had ever beheld. It was
        pitched on a prairie, with a park all about it, enclosing many a tree
        for more than two miles. It shone as the sun through the bright oaks
        (ll. 763-772).
      



        Gawayne urges on his steed Gringolet, and finds himself at the "chief
        gate." He called aloud, and soon there appeared a "porter" on the wall,
        who demanded his errand.
      



        "Good sir," quoth Gawayne, "wouldst thou go to the high lord of this
        house, and crave a lodging for me?"
      



        "Yea, by Peter!" replied the porter, "well I know that thou art welcome
        to dwell here as long as thou likest."
      



        The drawbridge is soon let down, and the gates opened wide to receive
        the knight. Many noble ones hasten to bid him welcome (ll. 773-825).
        They take away his helmet, sword, and shield, and many a proud one
        presses forward to do him honour. They bring him into the hall, where a
        fire was brightly burning upon the hearth. Then the lord of the land1
        comes from his chamber and welcomes Sir Gawayne, telling him that he is
        to consider the place as his own. Our knight is next conducted to a
        bright bower, where was noble bedding—curtains of pure silk, with
        golden hems, and Tarsic tapestries upon the walls and the floors (ll.
        826-859). Here the knight doffed his armour and put on rich robes, which
        so well became him, that all declared that a more comely knight Christ
        had never made (ll. 860-883).
      



        [1 Gawayne is now in the castle of the Green Knight, who,
        divested of his elvish or supernatural character, appears to our knight
        merely as a bold one with a beaver-hued beard.]
      



        A table is soon raised, and Gawayne, having washed, proceeds to meat.
        Many dishes are set before him—"sews" of various kinds, fish of
        all kinds, some baked in bread, others broiled on the embers, some
        boiled, and others seasoned with spices. The knight expresses himself
        well pleased, and calls it a most noble and princely feast.
      



        After dinner, in reply to numerous questions, he tells his host that he
        is Gawayne, one of the Knights of the Round Table. When this was made
        known great was the joy in the hall. Each one said softly to his
        companion, "Now we shall see courteous behaviour and learn the terms of
        noble discourse, since we have amongst us 'that fine father of nurture.'
        Truly God has highly favoured us in sending us such a noble guest as Sir
        Gawayne" (ll. 884-927). At the end of the Christmas festival Gawayne
        desires to take his departure from the castle, but his host persuades
        him to stay, promising to direct him to the Green Chapel (about two
        miles from the castle), that he may be there by the appointed time (ll.
        1029-1082).
      



        A covenant is made between them, the terms of which were that the lord
        of the castle should go out early to the chase, that Gawayne meanwhile
        should lie in his loft at his ease, then rise at his usual hour, and
        afterwards sit at table with his hostess, and that at the end of the day
        they should make an exchange of whatever they might obtain in the
        interim. "Whatever I win in the wood," says the lord, "shall be yours,
        and what thou gettest shall be mine" (ll. 1083-1125).
      



        Full early before daybreak the folk uprise, saddle their horses, and
        truss their mails. The noble lord of the land, arrayed for riding, eats
        hastily a sop, and having heard mass, proceeds with a hundred hunters to
        hunt the wild deer (ll. 1126-1177).
      



        All this time Gawayne lies in his gay bed. His nap is disturbed by a
        little noise at the door, which is softly opened. He heaves up his head
        out of the clothes, and, peeping through the curtains, beholds a most
        lovely lady (the wife of his host). She came towards the bed, and the
        knight laid himself down quickly, pretending to be asleep. The lady
        stole to the bed, cast up the curtains, crept within, sat her softly on
        the bed-side, and waited some time till the knight should awake. After
        lurking awhile under the clothes considering what it all meant, Gawayne
        unlocked his eyelids, and put on a look of surprise, at the same time
        making the sign of the cross, as if afraid of some hidden danger (ll.
        1178-1207). "Good morrow, sir," said that fair lady, "ye are a careless
        sleeper to let one enter thus. I shall bind you in your bed, of that be
        ye sure." "Good morrow," quoth Gawayne, "I shall act according to your
        will with great pleasure, but permit me to rise that I may the more
        comfortably converse with you." "Nay, beau sir," said that sweet one,
        "ye shall not rise from your bed, for since I have caught my knight I
        shall hold talk with him. I ween well that ye are Sir Gawayne that all
        the world worships, whose honour and courtesy are so greatly praised.
        Now ye are here, and we are alone (my lord and his men being afar off,
        other men, too, are in bed, so are my maidens), and the door is safely
        closed, I shall use my time well while it lasts. Ye are welcome to my
        person to do with it as ye please, and I will be your servant" (ll.
        1208-1240).
      



        Gawayne behaves most discreetly, for the remembrance of his forthcoming
        adventure at the Green Chapel prevents him from thinking of love (ll.
        1205-1289). At last the lady takes leave of the knight by catching him
        in her arms and kissing him (ll. 1290-1307). The day passes away
        merrily, and at dusk the Lord of the castle returns from the chase. He
        presents the venison to Gawayne according to the previous covenant
        between them. Our knight gives his host a kiss as the only piece of good
        fortune that had fallen to him during the day. "It is good," says the
        other, "and would be much better if ye would tell me where ye won such
        bliss" (ll. 1308-1394). "That was not in our covenant," replies Gawayne,
        "so try me no more." After much laughing on both sides they proceed to
        supper, and afterwards, while the choice wine is being carried round,
        Gawayne and his host renew their agreement. Late at night they take
        leave of each other and hasten to their beds. "By the time that the cock
        had crowed and cackled thrice" the lord was up, and after "meat and
        mass" were over the hunters make for the woods, where they give chase to
        a wild boar who had grown old and mischievous (ll. 1395-1467).
      



        While the sportsmen are hunting this "wild swine" our lovely knight lies
        in his bed. He is not forgotten by the lady, who pays him an early
        visit, seeking to make further trial of his virtues. She sits softly by
        his side and tells him that he has forgotten what she taught him the day
        before (ll. 1468-1486). "I taught you of kissing," says she; "that
        becomes every courteous knight." Gawayne says that he must not take that
        which is forbidden him. The lady replies that he is strong enough to
        enforce his own wishes. Our knight answers that every gift not given
        with a good will is worthless. His fair visitor then enquires how it is
        that he who is so skilled in the true sport of love and so renowned a
        knight, has never talked to her of love (ll. 1487-1524). "You ought,"
        she says, "to show and teach a young thing like me some tokens of
        true-love's crafts; I come hither and sit here alone to learn of you
        some game; do teach me of your wit while my lord is from home." Gawayne
        replies that he cannot undertake the task of expounding true-love and
        tales of arms to one who has far more wisdom than he possesses. Thus did
        our knight avoid all appearance of evil, though sorely pressed to do
        what was wrong (ll. 1525-1552). The lady, having bestowed two kisses
        upon Sir Gawayne, takes her leave of him (ll. 1553-1557).
      



        At the end of the day the lord of the castle returns home with the
        shields and head of the wild boar. He shows them to his guest, who
        declares that "such a brawn of a beast, nor such sides of a swine," he
        never before has seen. Gawayne takes possession of the spoil according
        to covenant, and in return he bestows two kisses upon his host, who
        declares that his guest has indeed been rich with "such chaffer" (ll.
        1558-1647).
      



        After much persuasion, Gawayne consents to stop at the castle another
        day (ll. 1648-1685). Early on the morrow the lord and his men hasten to
        the woods, and come upon the track of a fox, the hunting of which
        affords them plenty of employment and sport (ll. 1686-1730). Meanwhile
        our good knight sleeps soundly within his comely curtains. He is again
        visited by the lady of the castle. So gaily was she attired, and so
        "faultless of her features," that great joy warmed the heart of Sir
        Gawayne. With soft and pleasant smiles "they smite into mirth," and are
        soon engaged in conversation. Had not Mary thought of her knight, he
        would have been in great peril (ll. 1731-1769). So sorely does the fair
        one press him with her love, that he fears lest he should become a
        traitor to his host. The lady enquires whether he has a mistress to whom
        he has plighted his troth. The knight swears by St John that he neither
        has nor desires one. This answer causes the dame to sigh for sorrow, and
        telling him that she must depart, she asks for some gift, if it were
        only a glove, by which she might "think on the knight and lessen her
        grief" (ll. 1770-1800). Gawayne assures her that he has nothing worthy
        of her acceptance; that he is on an "uncouth errand," and therefore has
        "no men with no mails containing precious things," for which he is truly
        sorry.
      



        Quoth that lovesome (one)—
      




          "Though I had nought of yours,
        

          Yet should ye have of mine.
        




        Thus saying, she offers him a rich ring of red gold "with a shining
        stone standing aloft," that shone like the beams of the bright sun. The
        knight refused the gift, as he had nothing to give in return. "Since ye
        refuse my ring," says the lady, "because it seems too rich, and ye would
        not be beholden to me, I shall give you my girdle that is less valuable"
        (ll. 1801-1835). But Gawayne replies that he will not accept gold or
        reward of any kind, though "ever in hot and in cold" he will be her true
        servant.
      



        "Do ye refuse it," asks the lady, "because it seems simple and of little
        value? Whoso knew the virtues that are knit therein would estimate it
        more highly. For he who is girded with this green lace cannot be wounded
        or slain by any man under heaven." The knight thinks awhile, and it
        strikes him that this would be a "jewel for the jeopardy" that he had to
        undergo at the Green Chapel. So he not only accepts the lace, but
        promises to keep the possession of it a secret (ll. 1836-1865). By that
        time the lady had kissed him thrice, and she then takes "her leave and
        leaves him there."
      



        Gawayne rises, dresses himself in noble array, and conceals the "love
        lace" where he might find it again. He then hies to mass, shrives him of
        his misdeeds, and obtains absolution. On his return to the hall he
        solaces the ladies with comely carols and all kinds of joy (ll.
        1866-1892). The dark night came, and then the lord of the castle, having
        slain the fox, returns to his "dear home," where he finds a fire
        brightly turning and his guest amusing the ladies (ll. 1893-1927).
        Gawayne, in fulfilment of his agreement, kisses his host thrice.1
        "By Christ," quoth the other knight, "ye have caught much bliss. I have
        hunted all this day and nought have I got but the skin of this foul fox
        (the devil have the goods!), and that is full poor for to pay for such
        precious things" (ll. 1928-1951).
      



        After the usual evening's entertainment, Gawayne retires to rest. The
        next morning, being New Year's day, is cold and stormy. Snow falls, and
        the dales are full of drift. Our knight in his bed locks his eyelids,
        but full little he sleeps. By each cock that crows he knows the hour,
        and before day-break he calls for his chamberlain, who quickly brings
        him his armour (ll. 1952-2014). While Gawayne clothed himself in his
        rich weeds he forgot not the "lace, the lady's gift," but with it doubly
        girded his loins. He wore it not for its rich ornaments, "but to save
        himself when it behoved him to suffer," and as a safeguard against sword
        or knife (ll. 2015-2046).
      



        Having thanked his host and all the renowned assembly for the great
        kindness he had experienced at their hands, "he steps into stirrups and
        strides aloft" (ll. 2047-2068).
      



        The drawbridge is let down, and the broad gates unbarred and borne open
        upon both sides, and the knight, after commending the castle to Christ,
        passes thereout and goes on his way accompanied by his guide, that
        should teach him to turn to that place where he should receive the
        much-dreaded blow. They climb over cliffs, where each hill had a hat and
        a mist-cloak, until the next morn, when they find themselves on a full
        high hill covered with snow. The servant bids his master remain awhile,
        saying, "I have brought you hither at this time, and now ye are not far
        from that noted place that ye have so often enquired after. The place
        that ye press to is esteemed full perilous, and there dwells a man in
        that waste the worst upon earth, for he is stiff and stern and loves to
        strike, and greater is he than any man upon middle-earth, and his body
        is bigger than the best four in Arthur's house. He keeps the Green
        Chapel; there passes none by that place, however proud in arms, that he
        does not 'ding him to death with dint of his hand.' He is a man
        immoderate and 'no mercy uses,' for be it churl or chaplain that by the
        chapel rides, monk or mass-priest, or any man else, it is as pleasant to
        him to kill them as to go alive himself. Wherefore I tell thee truly,
        'come ye there, ye be killed, though ye had twenty lives to spend. He
        has dwelt there long of yore, and on field much sorrow has wrought.
        Against his sore dints ye may not defend you' (ll. 2069-2117).
        Therefore, good Sir Gawayne, let the man alone, and for God's sake go by
        some other path, and then I shall hie me home again. I swear to you by
      



        [1 He only in part keeps to his covenant, as he holds back
        the love-lace.]
      



        God and all His saints that I will never say that ever ye attempted to
        flee from any man."
      



        Gawayne thanks his guide for his well-meant kindness, but declares that
        to the Green Chapel he will go, though the owner thereof be "a stern
        knave," for God can devise means to save his servants.
      



        "Mary!" quoth the other, "since it pleases thee to lose thy life I will
        not hinder thee. Have thy helmet on thy head, thy spear in thy hand, and
        ride down this path by yon rock-side, till thou be brought to the bottom
        of the valley. Then look a little on the plain, on thy left hand, and
        thou shalt see in that slade the chapel itself, and the burly knight
        that guards it (ll. 2118-2148). Now, farewell Gawayne the noble! for all
        the gold upon ground I would not go with thee nor bear thee fellowship
        through this wood 'on foot farther.'" Thus having spoken, he gallops
        away and leaves the knight alone.
      



        Gawayne now pursues his journey, rides through the dale, and looks
        about. He sees no signs of a resting-place, but only high and steep
        banks, and the very shadows of the high woods seemed wild and distorted.
        No chapel, however, could he discover. After a while he sees a round
        hill by the side of a stream; thither he goes, alights, and fastens his
        horse to the branch of a tree. He walks about the hill, debating with
        himself what it might be. It had a hole in the one end and on each side,
        and everywhere overgrown with grass, but whether it was only an old cave
        or a crevice of an old crag he could not tell (ll. 2149-2188).
      



        "Now, indeed," quoth Gawayne, "a desert is here; this oratory is ugly
        with herbs overgrown. It is a fitting place for the man in green to
        'deal here his devotions after the devil's manner.' Now I feel it is the
        fiend (the devil) in my five wits that has covenanted with me that he
        may destroy me. This is a chapel of misfortune—evil betide it! It
        is the most cursed kirk that ever I came in." With his helmet on his
        head, and spear in his hand, he roams up to the rock, and then he hears
        from that high hill beyond the brook a wondrous wild noise. Lo! it
        clattered in the cliff as if one upon a grindstone were grinding a
        scythe. It whirred like the water at a mill, and rushed and re-echoed,
        terrible to hear. "Though my life I forgo," says Gawayne, "no noise
        shall cause me to fear."
      



        Then he cried aloud, "Who dwells in this place, discourse with me to
        hold? For now is good Gawayne going right here if any brave wight will
        hie him hither, either now or never" (ll. 2189-2216).
      



        "Abide," quoth one on the bank above, over his head, "and thou shalt
        have all in haste that I promised thee once."
      



        Soon there comes out of a hole in the crag, with a fell weapon a Danish
        axe quite new, the "man in the green," clothed as at first as his legs,
        locks and beard. But now he is on foot and walks on the earth. When he
        reaches the stream, he hops over and boldly strides about. He meets Sir
        Gawayne, who tells him that he is quite ready to fulfil his part of the
        compact. "Gawayne," quoth that 'green gome' (man), "may God preserve
        thee! Truly thou art welcome to my place, 'and thou hast timed thy
        travel' as a true man should. Thou knowest the covenants made between
        us, at this time twelve-month, that on New Year's day I should return
        thee thy blow. We are now in this valley by ourselves, and can do as we
        please (ll. 2217-2246). Have, therefore, thy helmet off thy head, and
        'have here thy pay.' Let us have no more talk than when thou didst
        strike off my head with a single blow."
      



        "Nay, by God!" quoth Gawayne, "I shall not begrudge thee thy will for
        any harm that may happen, but will stand still while thou strikest."
      



        Then he stoops a little and shows his bare neck, unmoved by any fear.
        The Green Knight takes up his "grim tool," and with all his force raises
        it aloft, as if he meant utterly to destroy him. As the axe came gliding
        down Gawayne "shrank a little with the shoulders from the sharp iron."
        The other withheld his weapon, and then reproved the prince with many
        proud words. "Thou art not Gawayne that is so good esteemed, that never
        feared for no host by hill nor by vale, for now thou fleest for fear
        before thou feelest harm (ll. 2247-2272). Such cowardice of that knight
        did I never hear. I never flinched nor fled when thou didst aim at me in
        King Arthur's house. My head flew to my feet and yet I never fled,
        wherefore I deserve to be called the better man."
      



        Quoth Gawayne, "I shunted once, but will do so no more, though my head
        fall on the stones. But hasten and bring me to the point; deal me my
        destiny, and do it out of hand, for I shall stand thee a stroke and
        start no more until thine axe has hit me—have here my troth."
        "Have at thee, then," said the other, and heaves the axe aloft, and
        looks as savagely as if he were mad. He aims at the other mightily, but
        withholds his hand ere it might hurt. Gawayne readily abides the blow
        without flinching with any member, and stood still as a stone or a tree
        fixed in rocky ground with a hundred roots.
      



        Then merrily the other did speak, "Since now thou hast thy heart whole
        it behoves me to strike, so take care of thy neck." Gawayne answers with
        great wroth, "Thrash on, thou fierce man, thou threatenest too long; I
        believe thy own heart fails thee."
      



        "Forsooth," quoth the other, "since thou speakest so boldly, I will no
        longer delay" (ll. 2273-2304). Then, contracting "both lips and brow,"
        he made ready to strike, and let fall his axe on the bare neck of Sir
        Gawayne. "Though he hammered" fiercely, he only "severed the hide,"
        causing the blood to flow. When Gawayne saw his blood on the snow, he
        quickly seized his helmet and placed it on his head. Then he drew out
        his bright sword, and thus angrily spoke: "Cease, man, of thy blow, bid
        me no more. I have received a stroke in this place without opposition,
        but if thou givest me any more readily shall I requite thee, of that be
        thou sure. Our covenant stipulates one stroke, and therefore now cease."
      



        The Green Knight, resting on his axe, looks on Sir Gawayne, as bold and
        fearless he there stood, and then with a loud voice thus addresses the
        knight: "Bold knight, be not so wroth, no man here has wronged thee (ll.
        2305-2339); I promised thee a stroke, and thou hast it, so hold thee
        well pleased. I could have dealt much worse with thee, and caused thee
        much sorrow. Two blows I aimed at thee, for twice thou kissedst my fair
        wife; but I struck thee not, because thou restoredst them to me
        according to agreement. At the third time thou failedst, and therefore I
        have given thee that tap. That woven girdle, given thee by my own wife,
        belongs to me. I know well thy kisses, thy conduct also, and the wooing
        of my wife, for I wrought it myself. I sent her to try thee, and truly
        methinks thou art the most faultless man that ever on foot went. Still,
        sir, thou wert wanting in good faith; but as it proceeded from no
        immorality, thou being only desirous of saving thy life, the less I
        blame thee."
      



        Gawayne stood confounded, the blood rushed into his face, and he shrank
        within himself for very shame. "Cursed," he cried, "be cowardice and
        covetousness both; in you are villany and vice, that virtue destroy."
        Then he takes off the girdle and throws it to the knight in green,
        cursing his cowardice and covetousness. The Green Knight, laughing, thus
        spoke: "Thou hast confessed so clean, and acknowledged thy faults, that
        I hold thee as pure as thou hadst never forfeited since thou wast first
        born. I give thee, sir, the gold-hemmed girdle as a token of thy
        adventure at the Green Chapel. Come now to my castle, and we shall enjoy
        together the festivities of the New Year" (ll. 2340-2406).
      



        "Nay, forsooth," quoth the knight, "but for your kindness may God
        requite you. Commend me to that courteous one your comely wife, who with
        her crafts has beguiled me. But it is no uncommon thing for a man to
        come to sorrow through women's wiles; for so was Adam beguiled with one,
        and Solomon with many. Samson was destroyed by Delilah, and David
        suffered much through Bathsheba. 'It were indeed great bliss for a
        man to love them well and believe them not.' Since the greatest upon
        earth were so beguiled, methinks I should be excused. But God reward you
        for your girdle, which I will ever wear in remembrance of my fault, and
        when pride shall exalt me, a look to this love-lace shall lessen it (ll.
        2407-2438). But since ye are the lord of yonder land, from whom I have
        received so much honour, tell me truly your right name, and I shall ask
        no more questions."
      



        Quoth the other, "I am called Bernlak de Hautdesert, through might of
        Morgain la Fay, who dwells in my house. Much has she learnt of Merlin,
        who knows all your knights at home. She brought me to your hall for to
        essay the prowess of the Round Table. She wrought this wonder to bereave
        you of your wits, hoping to have grieved Guenever and affrighted her to
        death by means of the man that spoke with his head in his hand before
        the high table. She is even thine aunt, Arthur's half sister; wherefore
        come to thine aunt, for all my household love thee."
      



        Gawayne refuses to accompany the Green Knight, and so, with many
        embraces and kind wishes, they separate—the one to his castle, the
        other to Arthur's court.
      



        After passing through many wild ways, our knight recovers from the wound
        in his neck, and at last comes safe and sound to the court of King
        Arthur. Great then was the joy of all; the king and queen kiss their
        brave knight, and make many enquiries about his journey. He tells them
        of his adventures, hiding nothing—"the chance of the chapel, the
        cheer of the knight, the love of the lady, and lastly of the lace."
        Groaning for grief and shame he shows them the cut in his neck, which he
        had received for his unfaithfulness (ll. 2439-2504). The king and his
        courtiers comfort the knight—they laugh loudly at his adventures,
        and unanimously agree that those lords and ladies that belonged to the
        Round Table, and each knight of the brotherhood should ever after wear a
        bright green belt for Gawayne's sake. And he upon whom it was conferred
        honoured it evermore after.
      



        Thus in Arthur's time this adventure befell, whereof the "Brutus Books"
        bear witness (ll. 2505-2530).
      


      I need not say that the Brutus Books we possess do not contain the
      legend here set forth, though it is not much more improbable than some of
      the statements contained in them. If the reader desires to know the
      relation in which this and the like stories stand to the original Arthur
      legends, he will find it discussed in Sir F. Madden's Preface to his
      edition of "Syr Gawayne," which also contains a sketch of the very
      different views taken of Sir Gawayne by the different Romance writers.
    

      Into this and other literary questions I do not enter here, as I
      have nothing to add to Sir F. Madden's statements; but in the text of the
      Poem I have differed from him in some few readings, which will be found
      noticed in the Notes and Glossary.
    

      As the manuscript is fast fading, I am glad that the existence of the
      Early English Text Society has enabled us to secure a wider diffusion of
      its contents before the original shall be no longer legible.
    

      We want nothing but an increased supply of members to enable us to give to
      a large circle of readers many an equally interesting record of Early
      English minds.
    


      SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNYȜT.
    

      [FYTTE THE FIRST.]
    

      I.
    


[Fol. 91a.]After the siege of Troy

          Siþen þe sege & þe assaut watȝ sesed at Troye,
        

          Þe borȝ brittened & brent to brondeȝ & askeȝ,
        

          Þe tulk þat þe trammes of tresoun þer wroȝt,
        
4

          Watȝ tried for his tricherie, þe trewest on erthe;
        

          Hit watȝ Ennias þe athel, & his highe kynde,
        

          Þat siþen depreced prouinces, & patrounes bicome
        

          Welneȝe of al þe wele in þe west iles,
        
Romulus built Rome, 8

          Fro riche Romulus to Rome ricchis hym swyþe,
        

          With gret bobbaunce þat burȝe he biges vpon
          fyrst,
        

          & neuenes hit his aune nome, as hit now hat;
        

          Ticius to Tuskan [turnes,] & teldes bigynnes;
        
12

          Langaberde in Lumbardie lyftes vp homes;
        
and Felix Brutus founded Britain,

          & fer ouer þe French flod Felix Brutus


          On mony bonkkes ful brode Bretayn he setteȝ,
        

          wyth wynne;
        
a land of war and wonder, 16

          Where werre, & wrake, & wonder,
        

          Bi syþeȝ hatȝ wont þer-inne,
        
and oft of bliss and blunder.

          & oft boþe blysse & blunder
        

          Ful skete hatȝ skyfted synne.
        



      II.
    


20

          Ande quen þis Bretayn watȝ bigged bi þis burn rych,
        
Bold men increased in the Land,

          Bolde bredden þer-inne, baret þat lofden,
        

          In mony turned tyme tene þat wroȝten;
        

          Mo ferlyes on þis folde han fallen here oft
        
and many marvels happened. 24

          Þen in any oþer þat I wot, syn þat ilk tyme.
        
Of all Britain's kings Arthur was the noblest.

          Bot of alle þat here bult of Bretaygne kynges
        

          Ay watȝ Arthur þe hendest; as I haf herde telle;
        
[Fol. 91b.]

          For-þi an aunter in erde I attle to schawe,
        
28

          Þat a selly in siȝt summe men hit holden,
        

          & an outtrage awenture of Arthureȝ wondereȝ;
        
Listen a while and ye shall hear the story of an
        "outrageous adventure."

          If ȝe wyl lysten þis laye bot on littel quile,
        

          I schal telle hit, as-tit, as I in toun herde,
        
32

          with tonge;
        

          As hit is stad & stoken,
        

          In stori stif & stronge,
        

          With lel letteres loken,
        
36

          In londe so hatȝ ben longe.
        



      III.
    


Arthur held at Camelot his Christmas feast,

          Þis kyng lay at Camylot vpon kryst-masse,
        

          With mony luflych lorde, ledeȝ of þe best,
        
with all the knights of the Round Table,

          Rekenly of þe rounde table alle þo rich breþer,
        
40

          With rych reuel oryȝt, & rechles merþes;
        

          Þer tournayed tulkes bi-tymeȝ ful mony,
        

          Iusted ful Iolilé þise gentyle kniȝtes,
        

          Syþen kayred to þe court, caroles to make.
        
full fifteen days. 44

          For þer þe fest watȝ ilyche ful fiften dayes,
        

          With alle þe mete & þe mirþe þat men couþe a-vyse;
        

          Such glaumande gle glorious to here,
        

          Dere dyn vp-on day, daunsyng on nyȝtes,
        
All was joy in hall and chamber, 48

          Al watȝ hap vpon heȝe in halleȝ & chambreȝ,
        

          With lordeȝ & ladies, as leuest him þoȝt;
        

          With all þe wele of þe worlde þay woned þer samen,
        
among brave knights and lovely ladies,

          Þe most kyd knyȝteȝ vnder kryste seluen,
        
52

          & þe louelokkest ladies þat euer lif haden,
        

          & he þe comlokest kyng þat þe court haldes;
        

          For al watȝ þis fayre folk in her first age,
        

          on sille;
        
the happiest under heaven. 56

          Þe hapnest vnder heuen,
        

          Kyng hyȝest mon of wylle,
        

          Hit were1 now gret nye to neuen


          So hardy a here on hille.
        


1 MS. werere.
      


      IV.
    


They celebrate the New Year with great joy.
60

          Wyle nw ȝer watȝ so ȝep þat hit watȝ nwe cummen,
        

          Þat day doubble on þe dece watȝ þe douth serued,
        

          Fro þe kyng watȝ cummen with knyȝtes
          in to þe halle,
        

          Þe chauntre of þe chapel cheued to an ende;
        
64

          Loude crye watȝ þer kest of clerkeȝ & oþer,
        
[Fol. 92]

          Nowel nayted o-newe, neuened ful ofte;
        

          & syþen riche forth runnen to reche honde-selle,
        
Gifts are demanded and bestowed.

          Ȝeȝed ȝeres ȝiftes on hiȝ, ȝelde hem bi
          hond,
        
68

          Debated busyly aboute þo giftes;
        

          Ladies laȝed ful loude, þoȝ þay lost haden,
        

          & he þat wan watȝ not wrothe, þat may ȝe wel
          trawe.
        
Lords and ladies take their seats at the table.

          Alle þis mirþe þay maden to þe mete tyme;
        
72

          When þay had waschen, worþyly þay wenten to sete,
        

          Þe best burne ay abof, as hit best semed;
        
Queen Guenever appears gaily dressed.

          Whene Guenore ful gay, grayþed in þe myddes.
        

          Dressed on þe dere des, dubbed al aboute,
        
76

          Smal sendal bisides, a selure hir ouer


          Of tryed Tolouse, of Tars tapites in-noghe,
        

          Þat were enbrawded & beten wyth þe best gemmes,
        

          Þat myȝt be preued of prys wyth penyes to bye,
        
80

          in daye;
        
A lady fairer of form might no one say he had
        ever before seen.

          Þe comlokest to discrye,
        

          Þer glent with yȝen gray,
        

          A semloker þat euer he syȝe,
        
84

          Soth moȝt no mon say.
        



      V.
    


Arthur would not eat,

          Bot Arthure wolde not ete til al were serued,
        

          He watȝ so Ioly of his Ioyfnes, & sum-quat child
          gered,
        

          His lif liked hym lyȝt, he louied þe lasse
        
nor would he long sit 88

          Auþer to lenge lye, or to longe sitte,
        

          So bi-sied him his ȝonge blod & his brayn wylde;
        

          & also anoþer maner meued him eke,
        

          Þat he þurȝ nobelay had nomen, ho wolde neuer ete
        
92

          Vpon such a dere day, er hym deuised were
        
until he had witnessed a "wondrous adventure" of
        some kind.

          Of sum auenturus þyng an vncouþe tale,
        

          Of sum mayn meruayle, þat he myȝt trawe,
        

          Of1 alderes, of armes, of oþer auenturus,
        
96

          Oþer sum segg hym bi-soȝt of sum siker knyȝt,
        

          To Ioyne wyth hym in iustyng in Iopardé to lay,
        

          Lede lif for lyf, leue vchon oþer,
        

          As fortune wolde fulsun hom þe fayrer to haue.
        
100

          Þis watȝ [þe] kynges countenaunce where he in
          court were,
        

          At vch farand fest among his fre meny,
        
[Fol. 92b.]

          in halle;
        
He of face so bold makes much mirth with all.

          Þer-fore of face so fere.
        
104

          He stiȝtleȝ stif in stalle,
        

          Ful ȝep in þat nw ȝere,
        

          Much mirthe he mas with alle.
        


1 Of of, in MS.
      


      VI.
    


The king talks with his knights.

          Thus þer stondes in stale þe stif kyng
          his-seluen,
        
108

          Talkkande bifore þe hyȝe table of trifles ful hende
        
Gawayne,

          There gode Gawan watȝ grayþed, Gwenore bisyde
        
Agravayn,

          & Agrauayn a la dure mayn on þat oþer syde sittes
        

          Boþe þe kynges sister sunes, & ful siker kniȝtes;
        
Bishop Bawdewyn, 112

          Bischop Bawdewyn abof bi-gineȝ þe table,
        
and Ywain sit on the dais.

          & Ywan, Vryn son, ette wit hym-seluen;
        

          Þise were diȝt on þe des, & derworþly serued,
        

          & siþen mony siker segge at þe sidbordeȝ.
        
The first course is served with cracking of
        trumpets. 116

          Þen þe first cors come with crakkyng of trumpes,
        

          Wyth mony baner ful bryȝt, þat þer-bi henged,
        

          Nwe nakryn noyse with þe noble pipes,
        

          Wylde werbles & wyȝt wakned lote,
        
120

          Þat mony hert ful hiȝe hef at her towches;
        
It consisted of all dainties in season.

          Dayntes dryuen þer-wyth of ful dere metes,
        

          Foysoun of þe fresche, & on so fele disches,
        

          Þat pine to fynde þe place þe peple bi-forne
        
124

          For to sette þe syluener,1 þat sere sewes halden,
        

          on clothe;
        

          Iche lede as he loued hym-selue
        

          Þer laght with-outen loþe,
        
Each two had dishes twelve, 128

          Ay two had disches twelue,
        
good beer and bright wine both.

          Good ber, & bryȝt wyn boþe.
        


1 svlueren (?) (dishes).
      


      VII.
    


There was no want of anything.

          Now wyl I of hor seruise say yow no more,
        

          For veh wyȝe may wel wit no wont þat þer were;
        
Scarcely had the first course commenced,
132

          An oþer noyse ful newe neȝed biliue,
        

          Þat þe lude myȝt haf leue lif-lode to cach.
        

          For vneþe watȝ þe noyce not a whyle sesed,
        

          & þe fyrst cource in þe court kyndely serued,
        
when there rushes in at the hall-door a knight;
136

          Þer hales in at þe halle dor an aghlich mayster,
        

          On þe most on þe molde on mesure hyghe;
        

          Fro þe swyre to þe swange so sware & so þik,
        
the tallest on earth

          & his lyndes & his lymes so longe & so grete,
        
[Fol. 93.] 140

          Half etayn in erde I hope þat he were.
        
he must have been.

          Bot mon most I algate mynn hym to bene,
        

          & þat þe myriest in his muckel þat myȝt ride;
        
His back and breast were great,

          For of bak & of brest al were his bodi sturne,
        
but his belly and waist were small. 144

          Bot his wombe & his wast were worthily smale,
        

          & alle his fetures folȝande, in forme þat he hade,
        

          ful clene;
        

          For wonder of his hwe men hade,
        
148

          Set in his semblaunt sene;
        

          He ferde as freke were fade,
        

          & ouer-al enker grene.
        



      VIII.
    


He was clothed entirely in green.

          Ande al grayþed in grene þis gome & his wedes,
        
152

          A strayt cote ful streȝt, þat stek on his sides,
        

          A mere mantile abof, mensked with-inne,
        

          With pelure pured apert þe pane ful clene,
        

          With blyþe blaunner ful bryȝt, &
          his hod boþe,
        
156

          Þat watȝ laȝt fro his lokkeȝ, & layde on his
          schulderes
        

          Heme wel haled, hose of þat same grene,
        
His spurs were of bright gold.

          Þat spenet on his sparlyr, & clene spures vnder,
        

          Of bryȝt golde, vpon silk bordes, barred ful ryche
        
160

          & scholes vnder schankes, þere þe schalk rides;
        

          & alle his vesture uerayly watȝ clene verdure,
        

          Boþe þe barres of his belt & oþer blyþe stones,
        

          Þat were richely rayled in his aray clene,
        
His saddle was embroidered with birds and flies.
164

          Aboutte hym-self & his sadel, vpon silk werkeȝ,
        

          Þat were to tor for to telle of tryfles þe halue,
        

          Þat were enbrauded abof, wyth bryddes & flyȝes,
        

          With gay gaudi of grene, þe golde ay in myddes;
        
168

          Þe pendauntes of his payttrure, þe proude cropure
        

          His molaynes, & alle þe metail anamayld was þenne
        

          Þe steropes þat he stod on, stayned of þe same,
        

          & his arsounȝ al after, & his aþel sturtes,
        
172

          Þat euer glemered1 & glent al of grene stones.
        
The foal that he rode upon was green;

          Þe fole þat he ferkkes on, fyn of þat ilke,
        

          sertayn;
        

          A grene hors gret & þikke,
        
it was a steed full stiff to guide. 176

          A stede ful stif to strayne,
        

          In brawden brydel quik,
        
[Fol. 93b.]

          To þe gome he watȝ ful gayn.
        


1 glemed (?).
      


      IX.
    


Gaily was the knight attired.

          Wel gay watȝ þis gome gered in grene,
        
180

          & þe here of his hed of his hors swete;
        

          Fayre fannand fax vmbe-foldes his schulderes;
        
His great beard, like a bush, hung on his breast.

          A much berd as1 a busk ouer his brest henges,
        

          Þat wyth his hiȝlich here, þat of his hed reches,
        
184

          Watȝ euesed al vmbe-torne, a-bof his elbowes,
        

          Þat half his armes þer vnder were halched in þe wyse
        

          Of a kyngeȝ capados, þat closes his swyre.
        
The horse's mane was decked with golden threads.

          Þe mane of þat mayn hors much to hit lyke,
        
188

          Wel cresped & cemmed wyth knottes ful mony,
        

          Folden in wyth fildore aboute þe fayre grene,
        

          Ay a herle of þe here, an oþer of golde;
        
Its tail was bound with a green band.

          Þe tayl & his toppyng twynnen of a sute,
        
192

          & bounden boþe wyth a bande of a bryȝt grene,
        

          Dubbed wyth ful dere stoneȝ, as þe dok lasted,
        

          Syþen þrawen wyth a þwong a þwarle knot alofte,
        

          Þer mony belleȝ ful bryȝt of brende golde rungen.
        
Such a foal nor a knight were never before seen.
196

          Such a fole vpon folde, ne freke þat hym rydes,
        

          Watȝ neuer sene in þat sale wyth syȝt er þat
          tyme,
        

          with yȝe;
        

          He loked as layt so lyȝt,
        
200

          So sayd al þat hym syȝe,
        
It seemed that no man might endure his dints.

          Hit semed as no mon myȝt,
        

          Vnder his dyntteȝ dryȝe.
        


1 as as, in MS.
      


      X.
    


The knight carried neither spear nor shield,

          Wheþer hade he no helme ne hawb[e]rgh nauþer,
        
204

          Ne no pysan, ne no plate þat pented to armes,
        

          Ne no schafte, ne no schelde, to schwne ne to smyte,
        
In one hand was a holly bough,

          Bot in his on honde he hade a holyn bobbe,
        

          Þat is grattest in grene, when greueȝ ar bare,
        
in the other an axe, 208

          & an ax in his oþer, a hoge & vn-mete,
        

          A spetos sparþe to expoun in spelle quo-so myȝt;
        

          Þe hede of an elnȝerde þe large lenkþe hade,
        

          Þe grayn al of grene stele & of golde hewen,
        
the edge of which was as keen as a sharp razor,
212

          Þe bit burnyst bryȝt, with a brod egge,
        

          As wel schapen to schere as scharp rasores;
        

          Þe stele of a stif staf þe sturne hit bi-grypte,
        
[Fol. 94.]

          Þat watȝ wounden wyth yrn to þe wandeȝ ende,
        
and the handle was encased in iron, curiously
        "graven with green, in gracious works." 216

          & al bigrauen with grene, in gracios1
          werkes;
        

          A lace lapped aboute, þat louked at þe hede,
        

          & so after þe halme halched ful ofte,
        

          Wyth tryed tasseleȝ þerto tacched in-noghe,
        
Thus arrayed the Green Knight enters the hall,
220

          On botounȝ of þe bryȝt grene brayden ful ryche.
        

          Þis haþel heldeȝ hym in, & þe halle entres,
        

          Driuande to þe heȝe dece, dut he no woþe,
        
without saluting any one.

          Haylsed he neuer one, bot heȝe he ouer loked.
        
224

          Þe fyrst word þat he warp, "wher is," he sayd,
        
He asks for the "governor" of the company,

          "Þe gouernour of þis gyng? gladly I wolde
        

          Se þat segg in syȝt, & with hym
          self speke
        

          raysoun."
        
228

          To knyȝteȝ he kest his yȝe,
        

          & reled hym vp & doun,
        
and looks for the most renowned.

          He stemmed & con studie,
        

          Quo walt þer most renoun.
        


1 looks like gracons in MS.
      


      XI.
    


Much they marvel to see a man and a horse
232

          Ther watȝ lokyng on lenþe, þe lude to be-holde,
        

          For vch mon had meruayle quat hit mene myȝt,
        

          Þat a haþel & a horse myȝt such a hwe lach,
        
as green as grass.

          As growe grene as þe gres & grener hit semed,
        
236

          Þen grene aumayl on golde lowande bryȝter;
        

          Al studied þat þer stod, & stalked hym nerre,
        
Never before had they seen such a sight as this.

          Wyth al þe wonder of þe worlde, what he worch schulde.
        

          For fele sellyeȝ had þay sen, bot such neuer are,
        
240

          For-þi for fantoum & fayryȝe þe folk þere hit demed;
        
They were afraid to answer,

          Þer-fore to answare watȝ arȝe mony aþel freke,
        

          & al stouned at his steuen, & stonstil seten,
        
and were as silent as if sleep had taken
        possession of them;

          In a swoghe sylence þurȝ þe sale riche
        
244

          As al were slypped vpon slepe so slaked hor loteȝ
        

          in hyȝe;
        

          I deme hit not al for doute,
        
some from fear and others from courtesy.

          Bot sum for cortaysye,
        
248

          Bot let hym þat al schulde loute,
        

          Cast vnto þat wyȝe.
        



      XII.
    


Arthur salutes the Green Knight.

          Þenn Arþour bifore þe hiȝ dece þat auenture byholdeȝ,
        

          & rekenly hym reuerenced, for rad was he neuer,
        
252

          & sayde, "wyȝe, welcum iwys to þis place,
        
[Fol. 94b.]bids him welcome, and
        invites him to stay awhile.

          Þe hede of þis ostel Arthour I hat,
        

          Liȝt luflych adoun, & lenge, I þe praye,
        

          & quat so þy wylle is, we schal wyt after."
        
The knight says that he will not tarry.
256

          "Nay, as help me," quod þe haþel, "he þat on hyȝe syttes,
        

          To wone any quyle in þis won, hit watȝ not myn
          ernde;
        

          Bot for þe los of þe lede is lyft vp so hyȝe,
        

          & þy burȝ & þy burnes best ar holden,
        
260

          Stifest vnder stel-gere on stedes to ryde,
        
He seeks the most valiant that he may prove him.

          Þe wyȝtest & þe worþyest of þe worldes kynde,
        

          Preue for to play wyth in oþer pure laykeȝ;
        

          & here is kydde cortaysye, as I haf herd carp,
        
264

          & þat hatȝ wayned me hider, I-wyis, at þis tyme.
        

          Ȝe may be seker bi þis braunch þat I bere here,
        
He comes in peace.

          Þat I passe as in pes, & no plyȝt seche;
        

          For had I founded in fere, in feȝtyng
          wyse,
        
At home, however, he has both shield and spear.
268

          I haue a hauberghe at home & a helme boþe,
        

          A schelde, & a scharp spere, schinande bryȝt,
        

          Ande oþer weppenes to welde, I wene wel als,
        

          Bot for I wolde no were, my wedeȝ ar softer.
        
272

          Bot if þou be so bold as alle burneȝ tellen,
        

          Þou wyl grant me godly þe gomen þat I ask,
        

          bi ryȝt."
        
Arthur assures him that he shall not fail to find
        an opponent worthy of him.

          Arthour con onsware,
        
276

          & sayd, "sir cortays knyȝt,
        

          If þou craue batayl bare,
        

          Here fayleȝ þou not to fyȝt."
        



      XIII.
    


"I seek no fight," says the knight.

          "Nay, frayst I no fyȝt, in fayth I þe telle,
        
"'Here are only beardless children.' 280

          Hit arn aboute on þis bench bot berdleȝ chylder;
        

          If I were hasped in armes on a heȝe stede,
        
Here is no man to match me.

          Here is no mon me to mach, for myȝteȝ so1 wayke.
        

          For-þy I craue in þis court a crystmas gomen,
        
Here are brave ones many, 284

          For hit is ȝol & nwe ȝer, & here ar ȝep mony;
        

          If any so hardy in þis hous holdeȝ hym-seluen,
        
if any be bold enough to 'strike a stroke for
        another,'

          Be so bolde in his blod, brayn in hys hede,
        

          Þat dar stifly strike a strok for an oþer,
        
288

          I schal gif hym of my gyft þys giserne ryche,
        
this axe shall be his;

          Þis ax, þat is heué in-nogh, to hondele as hym
          lykes,
        
[Fol. 95.]

          & I schal bide þe fyrst bur, as bare as I sitte.
        

          If any freke be so felle to fonde þat I telle,
        
292

          Lepe lyȝtly me to, & lach þis weppen,
        

          I quit clayme hit for euer, kepe hit as his auen,
        
but I shall give him a 'stroke' in return

          & I schal stonde hym a strok, stif on þis flet,
        

          Elleȝ þou wyl diȝt me þe dom to dele hym an oþer,
        
296

          barlay;
        

          & ȝet gif hym respite,
        
within a twelvemonth and a day."

          A twelmonyth & a day;—
        

          Now hyȝe, & let se tite
        
300

          Dar any her-inne oȝt say."
        


1 MS. fo.
      


      XIV.
    


Fear kept all silent.

          If he hem stowned vpon fyrst, stiller were þanne
        

          Alle þe hered-men in halle, þe hyȝ & þe loȝe;
        
The knight rolled his red eyes about,

          Þe renk on his rounce hym ruched in his sadel,
        
304

          & runisch-ly his rede yȝen he reled aboute,
        
and bent his bristly green brows.

          Bende his bresed broȝeȝ, bly-cande grene,
        
Waving his beard awhile, he exclaimed:

          Wayued his berde for to wayte quo-so wolde ryse.
        

          When non wolde kepe hym with carp he coȝed
          ful hyȝe,
        
308

          Ande rimed hym ful richley, & ryȝt hym
          to speke:
        
"What! is this Arthur's court?

          "What, is þis Arþures hous," quod þe haþel þenne,
        

          "Þat al þe rous rennes of, þurȝ ryalmes so mony?
        

          Where is now your sourquydrye & your conquestes,
        
312

          Your gry[n]del-layk, & your greme, & your
          grete wordes?
        
Forsooth the renown of the Round Table is
        overturned 'with a word of one man's speech.'"

          Now is þe reuel & þe renoun of þe rounde table
        

          Ouer-walt wyth a worde of on wyȝes speche;
        

          For al dares for drede, with-oute dynt schewed!"
        
316

          Wyth þis he laȝes so loude, þat þe lorde greued;
        
Arthur blushes for shame.

          Þe blod schot for scham in-to his schyre face
        

          & lere;
        
He waxes as wroth as the wind.

          He wex as wroth as wynde,
        
320

          So did alle þat þer were
        

          Þe kyng as kene bi kynde,
        

          Þen stod þat stif mon nere.
        



      XV.
    


He assures the knight that no one is afraid of
        his great words.

          Ande sayde, "haþel, by heuen þyn askyng is nys,
        
324

          & as þou foly hatȝ frayst, fynde þe be-houes;
        

          I know no gome þat is gast of þy grete wordes.
        

          Gif me now þy geserne, vpon godeȝ halue,
        

          & I schal bayþen þy bone, þat þou boden habbes."
        
[Fol. 95b.] 328

          Lyȝtly lepeȝ he hym to, & laȝt at his honde;
        

          Þen feersly þat oþer freke vpon fote lyȝtis.
        
Arthur seizes his axe.

          Now hatȝ Arthure his axe, & þe halme grypeȝ,
        

          & sturnely stureȝ hit aboute, þat stryke wyth hit þoȝt.
        
332

          Þe stif mon hym bifore stod vpon hyȝt,
        

          Herre þen ani in þe hous by þe hede & more;
        
The knight, stroking his beard, awaits the blow,
        and with a "dry countenance" draws down his coat.

          Wyth sturne schere1 þer he stod, he stroked his berde,
        

          & wyth a countenaunce dryȝe he droȝ doun
          his cote,
        
336

          No more mate ne dismayd for hys mayn dinteȝ,
        

          Þen any burne vpon bench hade broȝt hym to drynk
        

          of wyne,
        
Sir Gawayne beseeches the king to let him
        undertake the blow.

          Gawan, þat sate bi þe quene,
        
340

          To þe kyng he can enclyne,
        

          "I be-seche now with saȝeȝ sene,
        

          Þis melly mot be myne."
        


1 chere (?).
      


      XVI.
    



          "Wolde ȝe, worþilych lorde," quod Gawan to þe kyng,
        
He asks permission to leave the table; he says,
344

          "Bid me boȝe fro þis benche, & stonde by yow þere,
        

          Þat I wyth-oute vylanye myȝt voyde þis table,
        

          & þat my legge lady lyked not ille,
        

          I wolde com to your counseyl, bifore your cort
          ryche.
        
it is not meet that Arthur should be active in
        the matter, 348

          For me þink hit not semly, as hit is soþ knawen,
        

          Þer such an askyng is heuened so hyȝe in your
          sale,
        

          Þaȝȝe ȝour-self be talenttyf to take hit to your-seluen,
        
while so many bold ones sit upon bench.

          Whil mony so bolde yow aboute vpon bench sytten,
        
352

          Þat vnder heuen, I hope, non haȝer er of wylle,
        

          Ne better bodyes on bent, þer baret is rered;
        
Although the weakest, he is quite ready to meet
        the Green Knight.

          I am þe wakkest, I wot, and of wyt feblest,
        

          & lest lur of my lyf, quo laytes þe soþe,
        
356

          Bot for as much as ȝe ar myn em, I am only to prayse,
        

          No bounté bot your blod I in my bodé knowe;
        

          & syþen þis note is so nys, þat noȝt hit yow falles,
        

          & I haue frayned hit at yow fyrst, foldeȝ hit to me,
        
360

          & if I carp not comlyly, let alle þis cort rych,
        

          bout blame."
        
The nobles entreat Arthur to "give Gawayne the
        game."

          Ryche to-geder con roun,
        

          & syþen þay redden alle same,
        
364

          To ryd þe kyng wyth croun,
        

          & gif Gawan þe game.
        



      XVII.
    


[Fol. 96.]

          Þen comaunded þe kyng þe knyȝt for to ryse;
        

          & he ful radly vp ros, & ruchched hym fayre,
        
The king gives his nephew his weapon,
368

          Kneled doun bifore þe kyng, & cacheȝ þat
          weppen;
        

          & he luflyly hit hym laft, & lyfte vp his honde,
        

          & gef hym goddeȝ blessyng, & gladly hym
          biddes
        
and tells him to keep heart and hand steady.

          Þat his hert & his honde schulde hardi be boþe.
        
372

          "Kepe þe cosyn," quod þe kyng, "þat þou on kyrf
          sette,
        

          & if þou redeȝ hym ryȝt, redly I trowe,
        

          Þat þou schal byden þe bur þat he schal bede after.
        

          Gawan gotȝ to þe gome, with giserne in
          honde,
        
376

          & he baldly hym bydeȝ, he bayst neuer þe helder
        
The Green Knight enquires the name of his
        opponent.

          Þen carppeȝ to sir Gawan þe knyȝt in þe grene,
        

          "Refourme we oure for-wardes, er we fyrre passe.
        

          Fyrst I eþe þe, haþel, how þat þou hattes,
        
380

          Þat þou me telle truly, as I tryst may?"
        
Sir Gawayne tells him his name, and declares that
        he is willing to give and receive a blow.

          "In god fayth," quod þe goode knyȝt, "Gawan I hatte,
        

          Þat bede þe þis buffet, quat-so bi-falleȝ after,
        

          & at þis tyme twelmonyth take at þe anoþer,
        
384

          Wyth what weppen so1 þou wylt, & wyth no wyȝ
          elleȝ,
        

          on lyue."
        

          Þat oþer on-swareȝ agayn,
        

          "Sir Gawan, so mot I þryue,
        
The other thereof is glad. 388

          As I am ferly fayn.
        

          Þis dint þat þou schal dryue."
        


1 MS. fo.
      


      XVIII.
    


"It pleases me well, Sir Gawayne," says the Green
        Knight, "that I shall receive a blow from thy fist; but thou must swear
        that thou wilt seek me,

          "Bigog," quod þe grene knyȝt, "sir Gawan, melykes,
        

          Þat I schal fange at þy fust þat I haf frayst here;
        
392

          & þou hatȝ redily rehersed, bi resoun ful trwe,
        

          Clanly al þe couenaunt þat I þe kynge asked,
        

          Saf þat þou schal siker me, segge, bi þi trawþe,
        

          Þat þou schal seche me þi-self, where-so þou hopes
        
396

          I may be funde vpon folde, & foch þe such wages
        
to receive the blow in return."

          As þou deles me to day, bifore þis douþe ryche."
        
"Where shall I seek thee?" says Sir Gawayne;

          "Where schulde I wale þe," quod Gauan, "where is þy place?
        

          I wot neuer where þou wonyes, bi hym þat me wroȝt,
        
400

          Ne I know not þe, knyȝt, þy cort, ne þi name.
        
"tell me thy name and abode and I will find
        thee."

          Bot teche me truly þer-to, & telle me howe þou hattes,
        

          & I schal ware alle my wyt to wynne me þeder,
        
[Fol. 96b.]

          & þat I swere þe for soþe, & by my seker traweþ."
        
404

          "Þat is in-nogh in nwe ȝer, hit nedes no more,"
        

          Quod þe gome in þe grene to Gawan þe hende,
        
"When thou hast smitten me," says the knight,
        "then tell I thee of my home and name;

          "ȝif I þe telle trwly, quen I þe tape haue,
        

          & þou me smoþely hatȝ smyten, smartly I þe teche
        
408

          Of my hous, & my home, & myn owen nome,
        

          Þen may þou frayst my fare, & forwardeȝ holde,
        
if I speak not at all, so much the better for
        thee.

          & if I spende no speche, þenne spedeȝ þou þe
          better,
        

          For þou may leng in þy londe, & layt no fyrre,
        
412

          bot slokes;
        
Take now thy grim tool, and let us see how thou
        knockest."

          Ta now þy grymme tole to þe,
        

          & let se how þou cnokeȝ."
        

          "Gladly sir, for soþe,"
        
416

          Quod Gawan; his ax he strokes.
        



      XIX.
    


The Green Knight

          The grene knyȝt vpon grounde grayþely hym dresses,
        

          A littel lut with þe hede, þe lere he discouereȝ,
        
puts his long lovely locks aside and lays bare
        his neck.

          His longe louelych lokkeȝ he layd ouer his croun.
        
420

          Let þe naked nec to þe note schewe.
        

          Gauan gripped to his ax, & gederes hit on hyȝt,
        

          Þe kay fot on þe folde he be-fore sette,
        
Sir Gawayne lets fall his axe

          Let hit doun lyȝtly lyȝt on þe naked,
        
424

          Þat þe scharp of þe schalk schyndered þe bones,
        
and severs the head from the body.

          & schrank þurȝ þe schyire grece, & scade hit in
          twynne,
        

          Þat þe bit of þe broun stel bot on þe grounde.
        
The head falls to the earth.

          Þe fayre hede fro þe halce hit [felle] to þe erþe,
        
Many kick it aside with their feet. 428

          Þat fele hit foyned wyth her fete, þere hit forth roled;
        

          Þe blod brayd fro þe body, þat blykked on þe grene;
        
The knight never falters;

          & nawþer faltered ne fel þe freke neuer þe helder,
        

          Bot styþly he start forth vpon styf schonkes,
        
he rushes forth, seizes his head, 432

          & ru[n]yschly he raȝt out, þere as renkkeȝ stoden,
        

          Laȝt to his lufly hed, & lyft hit vp sone;
        

          & syþen boȝeȝ to his blonk, þe brydel he cachcheȝ,
        
steps into the saddle,

          Steppeȝ in to stel bawe & strydeȝ alofte,
        
holding the while the head in his hand by the
        hair, 436

          & his hede by þe here in his honde haldeȝ;
        

          & as sadly þe segge hym in his sadel sette,
        

          As non vnhap had hym ayled, þaȝ hedleȝ he1
          we[re],
        

          in stedde;
        
and turns his horse about. 440

          He brayde his bluk2 aboute,
        
[Fol. 97.]

          Þat vgly bodi þat bledde,
        

          Moni on of hym had doute,
        

          Bi þat his resounȝ were redde.
        


1 MS. ho. 2 blunk (?).
      


      XX.
    


444

          For þe hede in his honde he haldeȝ vp euen,
        
The head lifts up its eyelids,

          To-ward þe derrest on þe dece he dresseȝ þe face,
        

          & hit lyfte vp þe yȝe-lyddeȝ, & loked ful brode,
        
and addresses Sir Gawayne; "Look thou, be ready
        to go as thou hast promised,

          & meled þus much with his muthe, as ȝe
          may now here.
        
448

          "Loke, Gawan, þou be grayþe to go as þou hetteȝ,
        

          & layte as lelly til þou me, lude, fynde,
        
and seek till thou findest me.

          As þou hatȝ hette in þis halle, herande þise knyȝtes;
        
Get thee to the Green Chapel,

          To þe grene chapel þou chose, I charge þe to fotte,
        
452

          Such a dunt as þou hatȝ dalt disserued þou habbeȝ,
        
there to receive a blow on New Year's morn.

          To be ȝederly ȝolden on nw ȝeres morn;
        

          Þe knyȝt of þe grene chapel men knowen me mony;
        
Fail thou never;

          For-þi me forto fynde if þou fraysteȝ, fayleȝ þou
          neuer,
        
come, or recreant be called." 456

          Þer-fore com, oþer recreaunt be calde þe be-houeus."
        

          With a runisch rout þe rayneȝ he torneȝ,
        
The Green Knight then rushes out of the hall, his
        head in his hand.

          Halled out at þe hal-dor, his hed in his hande,
        

          Þat þe fyr of þe flynt flaȝe fro fole houes.
        
460

          To quat kyth he be-com, knwe non þere,
        

          Neuermore þen þay wyste fram queþen he watȝ wonnen;
        

          what þenne?
        

          Þe kyng & Gawen þare,
        
At that green one Arthur and Gawayne "laugh and
        grin." 464

          At þat grene þay laȝe & grenne,
        

          ȝet breued watȝ hit ful bare,
        

          A meruayl among þo menne.
        



      XXI.
    


Arthur addresses the queen:

          Þaȝ Arþer þe hende kyng at hert hade wonder,
        
468

          He let no semblaunt be sene, bot sayde ful hyȝe
        

          To þe comlych quene, wyth cortays speche,
        
"Dear dame, be not dismayed; such marvels well
        become the Christmas festival;

          "Dere dame, to day demay yow neuer;
        

          Wel by-commes such craft vpon cristmasse,
        
472

          Laykyng of enterludeȝ, to laȝe & to syng.
        

          Among þise, kynde caroles of knyȝteȝ & ladyeȝ;
        
I may now go to meat.

          Neuer-þe-lece to my mete I may me wel dres,
        

          For I haf sen a selly, I may not for-sake."
        
476

          He glent vpon sir Gawen, & gaynly he sayde,
        
Sir Gawayne, hang up thine axe.

          "Now sir, heng vp þyn ax, þat hatȝ in-nogh hewen."
        
[Fol. 97b.]

          & hit watȝ don abof þe dece, on doser to henge,
        

          Þer alle men for meruayl myȝt on hit loke,
        
480

          & bi trwe tytel þer-of to telle þe wonder.
        
The king and his knights sit feasting at the
        board till day is ended.

          Þenne þay boȝed to a borde þise burnes to-geder,
        

          Þe kyng & þe gode knyȝt, & kene men hem
          serued
        

          Of alle dayntyeȝ double, as derrest myȝt falle,
        
484

          Wyth alle maner of mete & mynstralcie boþe;
        

          Wyth wele walt þay þat day, til worþed an ende,
        

          in londe.
        
Now beware, Sir Gawayne, lest thou fail to seek
        the adventure that thou hast taken in hand.

          Now þenk wel, sir Gawan,
        
488

          For woþe þat þou ne wonde,
        

          Þis auenture forto frayn,
        

          Þat þou hatȝ tan on honde.
        



      [FYTTE THE SECOND.]
    

      I.
    


This marvel serves to keep up a brisk
        conversation in Court.

          This hanselle hatȝ Arthur of auenturus on fyrst,
        
492

          In ȝonge ȝer, for he ȝerned ȝelpyng to
          here,
        

          Thaȝ hym wordeȝ were wane, when þay to sete wenten;
        

          Now ar þay stoken of sturne werk staf-ful her hond.
        

          Gawan watȝ glad to be-gynne þose gomneȝ in
          halle,
        
496

          Bot þaȝ þe ende be heuy, haf ȝe no wonder;
        

          For þaȝ men ben mery in mynde, quen þay han mayn
          drynk,
        
The year passes full quickly and never returns.

          A ȝere ȝernes ful ȝerne, & ȝeldeȝ neuer
          lyke,
        

          Þe forme to þe fynisment foldeȝ ful selden.
        
500

          For-þi þis ȝol ouer-ȝede, & þe ȝere after,
        

          & vche sesoun serlepes sued after oþer;
        
After Christmas comes the "crabbed Lenten."

          After crysten-masse com þe crabbed lentoun,
        

          Þat fraysteȝ flesch wyth þe fysche & fode more symple
        
504

          Bot þenne þe weder of þe worlde wyth wynter hit þrepeȝ,
        
Spring sets in and warm showers descend;

          Colde clengeȝ adoun, cloudeȝ vp-lyften,
        

          Schyre schedeȝ þe rayn in schowreȝ ful warme,
        

          Falleȝ vpon fayre flat, flowreȝ þere schewen,
        
the groves become green, 508

          Boþe groundeȝ & þe greueȝ grene ar her wedeȝ,
        
birds build and sing,

          Bryddeȝ busken to bylde, & bremlych syngen,
        
for joy of the summer that follows;

          For solace of þe softe somer þat sues þer after,
        

          bi bonk;
        
blossoms begin to bloom, 512

          & blossumeȝ bolne to blowe,
        

          Bi raweȝ rych & ronk,
        
and noble notes are heard in the woods

          Þen noteȝ noble in-noȝe,
        
[Fol. 98]

          Ar herde in wod so wlonk.
        



      II.
    


Then the soft winds of summer, 516

          After þe sesoun of somer wyth þe soft wyndeȝ,
        

          Quen ȝeferus syfleȝ hym-self on sedeȝ
          & erbeȝ,
        
beautiful are the flowers wet with dew-drops.

          Wela-wynne is þe wort þat woxes þer-oute.
        

          When þe donkande dewe dropeȝ of þe leueȝ,
        
520

          To bide a blysful blusch of þe bryȝt sunne.
        
But harvest approaches soon,

          Bot þen hyȝes heruest, & hardenes hym sone.
        

          Warneȝ hym for þe wynter to wax ful rype;
        
and drives the dust about.

          He dryues wyth droȝt þe dust for to ryse.
        
524

          Fro þe face of þe folde to flyȝe ful hyȝe;
        

          Wroþe wynde of þe welkyn wrasteleȝ with þe sunne,
        
The leaves drop off the trees,

          Þe leueȝ lancen fro þe lynde, & lyȝten on þe grounde,
        
the grass becomes gray, and all ripens and rots.

          & al grayes þe gres, þat grene watȝ ere;
        
528

          Þenne al rypeȝ & roteȝ þat ros vpon fyrst,
        

          & þus ȝirneȝ þe ȝere in ȝisterdayeȝ
          mony,
        
Winter winds round again,

          & wynter wyndeȝ aȝayn, as þe worlde askeȝ
        

          no sage.
        
532

          Til meȝel-mas mone,
        

          Watȝ cumen wyth wynter wage;
        
and then Sir Gawayne thinks of his dread journey.

          Þen þenkkeȝ Gawan ful sone,
        

          Of his anious uyage.
        



      III.
    


On All-hallows day Arthur makes a feast for his
        nephew's sake. 536

          Ȝet quyl al-hal-day with Arþer he lenges,
        

          & he made a fare on þat fest, for þe frekeȝ sake,
        

          With much reuel & ryche of þe rounde table;
        

          Knyȝteȝ ful cortays & comlych ladies,
        
540

          Al for luf of þat lede in longynge þay were,
        

          Bot neuer-þe-lece ne þe later þay neuened bot merþe,
        

          Mony ioyleȝ for þat ientyle iapeȝ þer maden.
        
After meat, Sir Gawayne thus speaks to his uncle:

          For aftter mete, with mournyng he meleȝ
          to his eme,
        
544

          & spekeȝ of his passage, & pertly he sayde,
        
"Now, liege lord, I ask leave of you,

          "Now, lege lorde of my lyf, leue I yow ask;
        

          ȝe knowe þe cost of þis cace, kepe I no more
        

          To telle yow teneȝ þer-of neuer bot trifel;
        
for I am bound on the morn to seek the Green
        Knight." 548

          Bot I am boun to þe bur barely to morne,
        

          To sech þe gome of þe grene, as god wyl me wysse."
        

          Þenne þe best of þe burȝ boȝed to-geder,
        

          Aywan, & Errik, & oþer ful mony,
        
[Fol. 98b.] 552

          Sir Doddinaual de Sauage, þe duk of Clarence,
        

          Launcelot, & Lyonel, & Lucan þe gode,
        

          Sir Boos, & sir Byduer, big men boþe,
        
Many nobles, the best of the court, counsel and
        comfort him.

          & mony oþer menskful, with Mador de la Port.
        
556

          Alle þis compayny of court com þe kyng nerre,
        

          For to counseyl þe knyȝt, with care at her hert;
        
Much sorrow prevails in the hall.

          Þere watȝ much derue1 doel driuen in þe sale,
        

          Þat so worthe as Wawan schulde wende on þat ernde,
        
560

          To dryȝe a delful dynt, & dele no more
        

          wyth bronde.
        

          Þe knyȝt mad ay god chere,
        

          & sayde, "quat schuld I wonde,
        
Gawayne declares that he has nothing to fear.
564

          Of destines derf & dere,
        

          What may mon do bot fonde?"
        


1 derne (?).
      


      IV.
    


On the morn he asks for his arms.

          He dowelleȝ þer al þat day, and dresseȝ on þe morn,
        

          Askeȝ erly hys armeȝ, & alle were þay broȝt
        
A carpet is spread on the floor, 568

          Fyrst a tule tapit, tyȝt ouer þe flet,
        

          & miche watȝ þe gyld gere þat glent þer alofte;
        
and he steps thereon.

          Þe stif mon steppeȝ þeron, & þe stel hondoleȝ,
        
He is dubbed in a doublet of Tarsic silk, and a
        well-made hood.

          Dubbed in a dublet of a dere tars,
        
572

          & syþen a crafty capados, closed aloft,
        

          Þat wyth a bryȝt blaunner was bounden with-inne;
        
They set steel slices on his feet, and lap his
        legs in steel greaves.

          Þenne set þay þe sabatounȝ vpon þe segge foteȝ,
        

          His legeȝ lapped in stel with luflych greueȝ,
        
576

          With polayneȝ piched þer-to, policed ful clene,
        

          Aboute his kneȝ knaged wyth knoteȝ of golde;
        
Fair cuisses enclose his thighs,

          Queme quyssewes þen, þat coyntlych closed
        

          His thik þrawen þyȝeȝ with þwonges
          to-tachched;
        
and afterwards they put on the steel habergeon,
580

          & syþen þe brawden bryne of bryȝt stel ryngeȝ,
        

          Vmbe-weued þat wyȝ, vpon wlonk stuffe;
        
well-burnished braces, elbow pieces, and gloves
        of plate.

          & wel bornyst brace vpon his boþe armes,
        

          With gode cowters & gay, & gloueȝ of plate,
        
584

          & alle þe godlych gere þat hym gayn schulde
        

          Þat tyde;
        
Over all this is placed the coat armour.

          Wyth ryche cote armure,
        
His spurs are then fixed,

          His gold sporeȝ spend with pryde,
        
and his sword is attached to his side by a silken
        girdle. 588

          Gurde wyth a bront ful sure,
        

          With silk sayn vmbe his syde.
        



      V.
    


[Fol. 99a.]Thus arrayed the knight
        hears mass,

          When he watȝ hasped in armes, his harnays watȝ ryche,
        

          Þe lest lachet ou[þ]er loupe lemed of golde;
        
592

          So harnayst as he watȝ he herkneȝ his masse,
        

          Offred & honoured at þe heȝe auter;
        
and afterwards takes leave of Arthur and his
        court.

          Syþen he comeȝ to þe kyng & to his cort fereȝ,
        

          Lacheȝ lufly his leue at lordeȝ & ladyeȝ;
        
596

          & þay hym kyst & conueyed, bikende hym to kryst.
        
By that time his horse Gringolet was ready,

          Bi þat watȝ Gryngolet grayth, & gurde with a
          sadel,
        

          Þat glemed ful gayly with mony golde frenges,
        

          Ay quere naylet ful nwe for þat note ryched;
        
600

          Þe brydel barred aboute, with bryȝt golde bounden;
        
the harness of which glittered like the "gleam of
        the sun."

          Þe apparayl of þe payttrure, & of þe proude skyrteȝ,
        

          Þe cropore, & þe couertor, acorded wyth þe arsouneȝ;
        

          & al watȝ rayled on red ryche golde nayleȝ,
        
604

          Þat al glytered & glent as glem of þe sunne.
        
Then Sir Gawayne sets his helmet upon his head,

          Þenne hentes he þe holme, & hastily hit kysses,
        

          Þat watȝ stapled stifly, & stoffed wyth-inne:
        

          Hit watȝ hyȝe on his hede, hasped bihynde,
        
fastened behind with a "urisoun," 608

          Wyth a lyȝtli vrysoun ouer þe auentayle,
        
richly embroidered with gems.

          Enbrawden & bounden wyth þe best gemmeȝ,
        

          On brode sylkyn borde, & bryddeȝ on semeȝ,
        

          As papiayeȝ paynted pernyng bitwene,
        
612

          Tortors & trulofeȝ entayled so þyk,
        

          As mony burde þer aboute had ben seuen wynter


          in toune;
        
The circle around the helmet was decked with
        diamonds.

          Þe cercle watȝ more o prys,
        
616

          Þat vmbe-clypped hys croun,
        

          Of diamaunteȝ a deuys,
        

          Þat boþe were bryȝt & broun.
        



      VI.
    


Then they show him his shield with the
        "pentangle" of pure gold.

          Then þay schewed hym þe schelde, þat was of schyr gouleȝ,
        
620

          Wyth þe pentangel de-paynt of pure golde hweȝ;
        

          He braydeȝ hit by þe baude-ryk, aboute þe hals kestes,
        

          Þat bisemed þe segge semlyly fayre.
        
The "pentangle" was devised by Solomon as a token
        of truth.

          & quy þe pentangel apendeȝ to þat prynce noble,
        
624

          I am in tent yow to telle, þof tary hyt me schulde;
        

          Hit is a syngne þat Salamon set sum-quyle,
        

          In bytoknyng of trawþe, bi tytle þat hit habbeȝ,
        
[Fol. 99b]

          For hit is a figure þat haldeȝ fyue poynteȝ,
        
628

          & vche lyne vmbe-lappeȝ & loukeȝ in oþer,
        
It is called the endless knot

          & ay quere hit is endeleȝ,1 & Englych hit
          callen
        

          Ouer-al, as I here, þe endeles knot.
        

          For-þy hit acordeȝ to þis knyȝt, & to his cler armeȝ,
        
632

          For ay faythful in fyue & sere fyue syþeȝ,
        
It well becomes the good Sir Gawayne,

          Gawan watȝ for gode knawen, & as golde pured,
        

          Voyded of vche vylany, wyth vertueȝ2 ennourned
        

          in mote;
        
636

          For-þy þe pen-tangel nwe
        

          He ber in schelde & cote,
        
a knight the truest of speech and the fairest of
        form.

          As tulk of tale most trwe,
        

          & gentylest knyȝt of lote.
        


1 MS emdeleȝ. 2 MS verertueȝ
      


      VII.
    


He was found faultless in his five wits.
640

          Fyrst he watȝ funden fautleȝ in his fyue wytteȝ,
        

          & efte fayled neuer þe freke in his fyue fyngres,
        
His trust was in the five wounds.

          & alle his afyaunce vpon folde watȝ in þe fyue
          woundeȝ
        

          Þat Cryst kaȝt on þe croys, as þe crede telleȝ;
        
644

          & quere-so-euer þys mon in melly watȝ stad,
        

          His þro þoȝt watȝ in þat, þurȝ alle oþer
          þyngeȝ,
        

          Þat alle his forsnes he fong at þe fyue ioyeȝ,
        

          Þat þe hende heuen quene had of hir chylde;
        
648

          At þis cause þe knyȝt comlyche hade
        
The image of the Virgin was depicted upon his
        shield.

          In þe more half of his schelde hir ymage depaynted,
        

          Þat quen he blusched þerto, his belde neuer payred.
        

          Þe fyrst1 fyue þat I finde þat þe frek vsed,
        
652

          Watȝ fraunchyse, & felaȝschyp for-be2
          al þyng;
        
In cleanness and courtesy he was never found
        wanting,

          His clannes & his cortaysye croked were neuer,
        

          & pite, þat passeȝ alle poynteȝ, þyse pure fyue
        

          Were harder happed on þat haþel þen on any oþer.
        
656

          Now alle þese fyue syþeȝ, forsoþe, were fetled on þis knyȝt,
        

          & vchone halched in oþer, þat non ende hade,
        

          & fyched vpon fyue poynteȝ, þat fayld neuer,
        

          Ne samned neuer in no syde, ne sundred nouþ[er],
        
660

          With-outen ende at any noke [a]i quere fynde,
        

          Where-euer þe gomen bygan, or glod to an ende.
        
therefore was the endless knot fastened on his
        shield.

          Þer-fore on his schene schelde schapen watȝ þe knot,
        

          Þus alle wyth red golde vpon rede gowleȝ,
        
[Fol. 100] 664

          Þat is þe pure pentaungel wyth þe peple called,
        

          with lore.
        

          Now grayþed is Gawan gay,
        
Sir Gawayne seizes his lance and bids all "good
        day."

          & laȝt his launce ryȝt þore,
        
668

          & gef hem alle goud day,
        

          He wende for euer more.
        


1 MS fyft. 2 for-bi (?).
      


      VIII.
    


He spurs his horse and goes on his way.

          He sperred þe sted with þe spureȝ, & sprong on
          his way,
        

          So stif þat þe ston fyr stroke out þer-after;
        
All that saw that seemly one mourned in their
        hearts. 672

          Al þat seȝ þat semly syked in hert,
        

          & sayde soþly al same segges til oþer,
        

          Carande for þat comly, "bi Kryst, hit is scaþe,
        

          Þat þou, leude, schal be lost, þat art of lyf noble!
        
They declared that his equal was not to be found
        upon earth. 676

          To fynde hys fere vpon folde, in fayth is not eþe;
        

          Warloker to haf wroȝt had more wyt bene,
        

          & haf dyȝt ȝonder dere a duk to haue worþed;
        
It would have been better for him to have been a
        leader of men,

          A lowande leder of ledeȝ in londe hym wel semeȝ,
        
680

          & so had better haf ben þen britned to noȝt,
        
than to die by the hands of "an elvish man."

          Hadet wyth an aluisch mon, for angardeȝ pryde.
        

          Who knew euer any kyng such counsel to take,
        

          As knyȝteȝ in cauelounȝ on cryst-masse
          gomneȝ!"
        
Much was the warm water that poured from eyes
        that day. 684

          Wel much watȝ þe warme water þat waltered of yȝen,
        

          When þat semly syre soȝt fro þo woneȝ
        

          þat1 daye;
        

          He made non abode,
        
688

          Bot wyȝtly went hys way,
        
Meanwhile many a weary way goes Sir Gawayne.

          Mony wylsum way he rode,
        

          Þe bok as I herde say.
        


1 MS. þad.
      


      IX.
    


Now rides the knight through the realms of
        England.

          Now rideȝ þis renk þurȝ þe ryalme of Logres,
        
692

          Sir Gauan on Godeȝ halue, þaȝ hym no gomen þoȝt;
        

          Oft, leudleȝ alone, he lengeȝ on nyȝteȝ,
        

          Þer he fonde noȝt hym byfore þe fare þat he lyked;
        
He has no companion but his horse.

          Hade he no fere bot his fole, bi frytheȝ & douneȝ,
        
696

          Ne no gome bot God, bi gate wyth to karp,
        
No men does he see till he approaches North
        Wales.

          Til þat he neȝed ful noghe1 in to þe
          Norþe Waleȝ;
        

          Alle þe iles of Anglesay on lyft half he haldeȝ,
        

          & fareȝ ouer þe fordeȝ by þe for-londeȝ,
        
From Holyhead he passes into Wirral. 700

          Ouer at þe Holy-Hede, til he hade eft bonk
        

          In þe wyldrenesse of Wyrale; wonde þer bot lyte
        
[Fol. 100b]There he finds but few
        that loved God or man.

          Þat auþer God oþer gome wyth goud hert louied.
        

          & ay he frayned, as he ferde, at frekeȝ þat he met,
        
He enquires after the Green Knight of the Green
        Chapel, 704

          If þay hade herde any karp of a knyȝt grene,
        

          In any grounde þer-aboute, of þe grene chapel;2


          & al nykked hym wyth nay, þat neuer in her
          lyue
        
but can gain no tidings of him.

          Þay seȝe neuer no segge þat watȝ of suche hweȝ
        
708

          of grene.
        

          Þe knyȝt tok gates straunge,
        

          In mony a bonk vnbene,
        
His cheer oft changed before he found the Chapel.

          His cher ful oft con chaunge,
        
712

          Þat chapel er he myȝt sene.
        


1 nyghe (?). 2 MS. clapel.
      


      X.
    


Many a cliff he climbed over;

          Mony klyf he ouer-clambe in contrayeȝ straunge,
        

          Fer floten fro his frendeȝ fremedly he rydeȝ;
        
many a ford and stream he crossed, and everywhere
        he found a foe.

          At vche warþe oþer water þer þe wyȝe passed,
        
716

          He fonde a foo hym byfore, bot ferly hit were,
        

          & þat so foule & so felle, þat feȝt hym by-hode;
        
It were too tedious to tell the tenth part of his
        adventures

          So mony meruayl hi mount þer þe mon fyndeȝ,
        

          Hit were to tore for to telle of þe tenþe dole.
        
with serpents, wolves, and wild men; 720

          Sumwhyle wyth wormeȝ he werreȝ, & with
          wolues als,
        

          Sumwhyle wyth wodwos, þat woned in þe knarreȝ,
        
with bulls, bears, and boars.

          Boþe wyth bulleȝ & bereȝ, & boreȝ oþer-quyle,
        

          & etayneȝ, þat hym a-nelede, of þe heȝe felle;
        
Had he not been both brave and good, doubtless he
        had been dead. 724

          Nade he ben duȝty & dryȝe, & dryȝtyn had
          serued,
        

          Douteles he hade ben ded, & dreped ful ofte.
        
The sharp winter was far worse than any war that
        ever troubled him.

          For werre wrathed hym not so much, þat wynter was
          wors,
        

          When þe colde cler water fro þe cloudeȝ schadden,
        
728

          & fres er hit falle myȝt to þe fale erþe;
        

          Ner slayn wyth þe slete he sleped in his yrnes,
        

          Mo nyȝteȝ þen in-noghe in naked rokkeȝ,
        

          Þer as claterande fro þe crest þe colde borne renneȝ,
        
732

          & henged heȝe ouer his hede in hard
          ÿsse-ikkles.
        
Thus in peril he travels till Christmas-eve.

          Þus in peryl, & payne, & plytes ful harde,
        

          Bi contray caryeȝ þis knyȝt, tyl kryst-masse euen,
        

          al one;
        
736

          Þe knyȝt wel þat tyde,
        
To the Virgin Mary he prays to guide him to some
        abode.

          To Mary made his mone.
        

          Þat ho hym red to ryde,
        
[Fol. 101.]

          & wysse hym to sum wone.
        



      XI.
    


On the morn Sir Gawayne finds himself in a deep
        forest, 740

          Bi a mounte on þe morne meryly he rydes,
        

          Into a forest ful dep, þat ferly watȝ wylde,
        

          Hiȝe hilleȝ on vche a halue, & holt wodeȝ vnder,
        
where were old oaks many a hundred.

          Of hore okeȝ fill hoge a hundreth to-geder;
        
744

          Þe hasel & þe haȝ-þorne were harled al samen,
        

          With roȝe raged mosse rayled ay-where,
        
Many sad birds upon bare twigs piped piteously
        for the cold.

          With mony bryddeȝ vnblyþe vpon bare twyges,
        

          Þat pitosly þer piped for pyne of þe colde.
        
748

          Þe gome vpon Gryngolet glydeȝ hem vnder,
        
Through many a mire he goes, that he may
        celebrate the birth of Christ.

          Þurȝ mony misy & myre, mon al hym one,
        

          Carande for his costes, lest he ne keuer schulde,
        

          To se þe seruy1 of þat syre, þat on þat self nyȝt
        
752

          Of a burde watȝ borne, oure baret to quelle;
        
He beseeches the Virgin Mary to direct him to
        some lodging where he may hear mass.

          & þerfore sykyng he sayde, "I be-seche þe, lorde,
        

          & Mary, þat is myldest moder so dere.
        

          Of sum herber, þer heȝly I myȝt here masse.
        
756

          Ande þy matyneȝ to-morne, mekely I ask,
        

          & þer-to prestly I pray my pater & aue,
        

          & crede."
        

          He rode in his prayere,
        
760

          & cryed for his mysdede,
        
Blessing himself, he says, "Cross of Christ,
        speed me!"

          He sayned hym in syþes sere,
        

          & sayde "cros Kryst me spede!"
        


1 seruyce (?).
      


      XII.
    


Scarcely had he blessed himself thrice

          Nade he sayned hym-self, segge, bot þrye,
        
764

          Er he watȝ war in þe wod of a won in a mote.
        
when he saw a dwelling in the wood, set on a
        hill,

          Abof a launde, on a lawe, loken vnder boȝeȝ,
        

          Of mony borelych bole, aboute bi þe diches;
        
the comeliest castle that knight ever owned.

          A castel þe comlokest þat euer knyȝt aȝte,
        
768

          Pyched on a prayere, a park al aboute,
        

          With a pyked palays, pyned ful þik,
        

          Þat vmbe-teȝe mony tre mo þen two myle.
        

          Þat holde on þat on syde þe haþel auysed,
        
It shone as the sun through the bright oaks.
772

          As hit schemered & schon þurȝ þe schyre okeȝ;
        

          Þenne hatȝ he hendly of his helme, & heȝly he
          þonkeȝ
        

          Iesus & say[nt] Gilyan, þat gentyle ar boþe,
        
[Fol. 101b.]

          Þat cortaysly hade hym kydde, & his cry herkened.
        
776

          "Now bone hostel," coþe þe burne, "I be-seche yow ȝette!"
        

          Þenne gedereȝ he to Gryngolet with þe gilt
          heleȝ,
        
Sir Gawayne goes to the chief gate,

          & he ful chauncely hatȝ chosen to þe chef gate,
        

          Þat broȝt bremly þe burne to þe bryge ende,
        
780

          in haste;
        
and finds the draw-bridge raised, and the gates
        shut fast.

          Þe bryge watȝ breme vp-brayde,
        

          Þe ȝateȝ wer stoken faste,
        

          Þe walleȝ were wel arayed,
        
784

          Hit dut no wyndeȝ blaste.
        



      XIII.
    


The knight abides on the bank,

          Þe burne bode on bonk, þat on blonk houed,
        

          Of þe depe double dich þat drof to þe place,
        

          Þe walle wod in þe water wonderly depe,
        
and observes the "huge height," 788

          Ande eft a ful huge heȝt hit haled vpon lofte,
        

          Of harde hewen ston vp to þe tableȝ,
        
with its battlements and watch towers.

          Enbaned vnder þe abataylment, in þe best lawe;
        

          & syþen garyteȝ ful gaye gered bi-twene,
        
792

          Wyth mony luflych loupe, þat louked ful clene;
        

          A better barbican þat burne blusched vpon neuer;
        

          & innermore he be-helde þat halle ful hyȝe,
        
Bright and long were its round towers,

          Towre telded bytwene trochet ful þik,
        
796

          Fayre fylyoleȝ þat fyȝed, & ferlyly long,
        
with their well-made capitals.

          With coruon coprounes, craftyly sleȝe;
        

          Chalk whyt chymnees þer ches he in-noȝe,
        

          Vpon bastel roueȝ, þat blenked ful quyte;
        
800

          So mony pynakle payntet watȝ poudred ay quere,
        

          Among þe castel carneleȝ, clambred so þik,
        

          Þat pared out of papure purely hit semed.
        
He thinks it fair enough if he might only come
        within the cloister.

          Þe fre freke on þe fole hit fayr in-n[o]ghe þoȝt,
        
804

          If he myȝt keuer to com þe cloyster wyth-inne,
        

          To herber in þat hostel, whyl halyday lested
        

          auinant;
        
He calls, and soon there comes a porter to know
        the knight's errand.

          He calde, & sone þer com
        
808

          A porter pure plesaunt,
        

          On þe wal his ernd he nome,
        

          & haylsed þe knyȝt erraunt.
        



      XIV.
    


"Good sir," says Gawayne, "ask the high lord of
        this house to grant me a lodging."

          "Gode sir," quod Gawan, "woldeȝ þou go myn
          ernde,
        
812

          To þe heȝ lorde of þis hous, herber to craue?"
        
[Fol. 102.]

          "ȝe, Peter," quod þe porter, "& purely I
          trowe,1

"You are welcome to dwell here as long as you
        like," replied the porter.

          Þat ȝe be, wyȝe, welcum to won quyle yow lykeȝ."
        

          Þen ȝede þat wyȝe aȝayn awyþe,
        
816

          & folke frely hym wyth, to fonge þe knyȝt;
        
The draw-bridge is let down,

          Þay let doun þe grete draȝt, & derely out ȝeden,
        

          & kneled doun on her knes vpon þe colde erþe,
        

          To welcum þis ilk wyȝ, as worþy hom þoȝt;
        
and the gate is opened wide to receive him.
820

          Þay ȝolden hym þe brode ȝate, ȝarked vp wyde,
        

          & he hem raysed rekenly, & rod ouer þe brygge;
        

          Sere seggeȝ hym sesed by sadel, quel2 he lyȝt,
        
His horse is well stabled.

          & syþen stabeled his stede stif men in-noȝe.
        
Knights and squires bring Gawayne into the hall.
824

          Knyȝteȝ & swyereȝ comen doun þenne,
        

          For to bryng þis burne3 wyth blys in-to
          halle;
        
Many a one hastens to take his helmet and sword.

          Quen he hef vp his helme, þer hiȝed in-noghe


          For to hent hit at his honde, þe hende to seruen,
        
828

          His bronde & his blasoun boþe þay token.
        

          Þen haylsed he ful hendly þo haþeleȝ vch one,
        

          & mony proud mon þer presed, þat prynce to honour;
        

          Alle hasped in his heȝ wede to halle þay hym wonnen,
        
832

          Þer fayre fyre vpon flet fersly brenned.
        
The lord of the country bids him welcome,

          Þenne þe lorde of þe lede louteȝ fro his chambre,
        

          For to mete wyth menske þe mon on þe flor;
        

          He sayde, "ȝe ar welcum to welde as yow lykeȝ,
        
836

          Þat here is, al is yowre awen, to haue at yowre wylle
        

          & welde."
        

          "Graunt mercy," quod Gawayn,
        

          "Þer Kryst hit yow for-ȝelde,"
        
and they embrace each other. 840

          As frekeȝ þat semed fayn,
        

          Ayþer oþer in armeȝ con felde.
        


1 trowoe, MS. 2 quyle (?) or quen (?). 3
        buurne, MS.
      


      XV.
    


Gawayne looks on his host;

          Gawayn glyȝt on þe gome þat godly hym gret,
        
a big bold one he seemed.

          & þuȝt hit a bolde burne þat þe burȝ aȝte,
        
844

          A hoge haþel for þe noneȝ, & of hyghe elde;1

Beaver-hued was his broad beard,

          Brode bryȝt watȝ his berde, & al beuer hwed,
        

          Sturne stif on þe stryþþe on stal-worth schonkeȝ,
        
and his face as "fell as the fire."

          Felle face as þe fyre, & fre of hys speche;
        
848

          & wel hym semed for soþe, as þe segge þuȝt,
        

          To lede a lortschyp in lee of leudeȝ ful gode.
        
[Fol. 102b.]The lord leads Gawayne to
        a chamber, and assigns him a page to wait upon him.

          Þe lorde hym charred to a chambre, & chefly cumaundeȝ2


          To delyuer hym a leude, hym loȝly to serue;
        
852

          & þere were boun at his bode burneȝ in-noȝe,
        
In this bright bower was noble bedding;

          Þat broȝt hym to a bryȝt boure, þer beddyng
          watȝ noble,
        

          Of cortynes of clene sylk, wyth cler golde hemmeȝ,
        
the curtains were of pure silk with golden hems;

          & couertoreȝ ful curious, with comlych
          paneȝ,
        
856

          Of bryȝt blaunnier a-boue enbrawded bisydeȝ,
        

          Rudeleȝ rennande on ropeȝ, red golde ryngeȝ,
        
Tarsic tapestries covered the walls and the
        floor.

          Tapyteȝ tyȝt to þe woȝe, of tuly & tars,
        

          & vnder fete, on þe flet, of folȝande sute.
        
Here the knight doffed his armour, 860

          Þer he watȝ dispoyled, wyth specheȝ of myerþe,
        

          Þe burn of his bruny, & of his bryȝt wedeȝ;
        
and put on rich robes,

          Ryche robes ful rad renkkeȝ hem3 broȝten,
        

          For to charge, & to chaunge, & chose of þe best.
        
864

          Sone as he on hent, & happed þer-inne,
        

          Þat sete on hym4 semly, wyth saylande skyrteȝ,
        
which well became him.

          Þe ver by his uisage verayly hit semed
        

          Wel neȝ to vche haþel alle on hwes,
        
868

          Lowande & lufly, alle his lymmeȝ vnder,
        
A more comely knight Christ never made.

          Þat a comloker knyȝt neuer Kryst made,
        

          hem þoȝt;
        

          Wheþen in worlde he were,
        
872

          Hit semed as he myȝt
        

          Be prynce with-outen pere,
        

          In felde þer felle men fyȝt.
        


1 eldee, MS. 2 clesly, MS. 3 hym (?).
        4 MS. hyn.
      


      XVI.
    


A chair is placed for Sir Gawayne before the
        fireplace.

          A cheyer by-fore þe chemné, þer charcole brenned,
        
876

          Watȝ grayþed for sir Gawan, grayþely with
          cloþeȝ,
        

          Whyssynes vpon queldepoyntes, þa[t] koynt wer boþe;
        
A mantle of fine linen, richly embroidered, is
        thrown over him.

          & þenne a mere mantyle watȝ on þat mon cast,
        

          Of a broun bleeaunt, enbrauded ful ryche,
        
880

          & fayre furred wyth-inne with felleȝ of
          þe best,
        

          Alle of ermyn in erde, his hode of þe same;
        

          & he sete in þat settel semlych ryche,
        

          & achaufed hym chefly,1 & þenne his
          cher mended.
        
A table is soon raised, 884

          Sone watȝ telded vp a tapit, on tresteȝ ful fayre,
        
and the knight, having washed, proceeded to meat.

          Clad wyth a clene cloþe, þat cler quyt schewed,
        

          Sanap, & salure, & syluer-in sponeȝ;
        
[Fol. 103.]

          Þe wyȝe wesche at his wylle, & went to his mete
        
888

          Seggeȝ hym serued semly in-noȝe,
        
He is served with numerous dishes;

          Wyth sere sewes & sete,2 sesounde of þe best,
        

          Double felde, as hit falleȝ, & fele kyn fischeȝ;
        
with fish baked and broiled,

          Summe baken in bred, summe brad on þe gledeȝ,
        
or boiled and seasoned with spices. 892

          Summe soþen, summe in sewe, sauered with
          spyces,
        

          & ay sawes3 so sleȝeȝ, þat þe segge lyked.
        

          Þe freke calde hit a fest ful frely & ofte,
        
He calls it a full noble feast,

          Ful hendely, quen alle þe haþeles re-hayted hym at oneȝ
        
896

          as hende;
        

          "Þis penaunce now ȝe take,
        

          & eft hit schal amende;"
        
and much mirth he makes, for the wine is in his
        head.

          Þat mon much merþe con make.
        
900

          For wyn in his hed þat wende.
        


1 MS. cefly. 2 swete (?). 3 sewes (?).
      


      XVII.
    


Sir Gawayne, in answer to questions put to him,

          Þenne watȝ spyed & spured vpon spare wyse.
        

          Bi preue poynteȝ of þat prynce, put to hym-seluen,
        

          Þat he be-knew cortaysly of þe court þat he were,
        
tells the prince that he is of Arthur's court.
904

          Þat aþel Arthure þe hende haldeȝ hym one,
        

          Þat is þe ryche ryal kyng of þe rounde table;
        

          & hit watȝ Wawen hym-self þat in þat won sytteȝ,
        

          Comen to þat krystmasse, as case hym þen lymped.
        
When this was made known, 908

          When þe lorde hade lerned þat he þe leude hade,
        

          Loude laȝed he þerat, so lef hit hym þoȝt,
        
great was the joy in the hall.

          & alle þe men in þat mote maden much joye,
        

          To apere in his presense prestly þat tyme,
        
912

          Þat alle prys, & prowes, & pured þewes
        

          Apendes to hys persoun, & praysed is euer,
        

          By-fore alle men vpon molde, his mensk is þe most.
        
Each one said softly to his mate,

          Vch segge ful softly sayde to his fere,
        
"Now we shall see courteous manners and hear
        noble speech, 916

          "Now schal we semlych se sleȝteȝ of þeweȝ,
        

          & þe teccheles termes of talkyng noble,
        

          Wich spede is in speche, vnspurd may we lerne,
        
for we have amongst us the 'father of nurture.'

          Syn we haf fonged þat fyne fader of nurture;
        
920

          God hatȝ geuen vus his grace godly for soþe,
        

          Þat such a gest as Gawan graunteȝ vus to haue,
        

          When burneȝ blyþe of his burþe schal sitte
        

          & synge.
        
924

          In menyng of manereȝ mere,
        
[Fol. 103b.]

          Þis burne now schal vus bryng,
        
He that may him hear shall learn of
        love-talking."

          I hope þat may hym here,
        

          Schal lerne of luf-talkyng."
        



      XVIII.
    


After dinner the company go to the chapel,
928

          Bi þat þe diner watȝ done, & þe dere vp,
        

          Hit watȝ neȝ at þe niyȝt neȝed þe tyme;
        

          Chaplayneȝ1 to þe chapeles chosen þe gate,
        

          Rungen ful rychely, ryȝt as þay schulden,
        
to hear the evensong of the great season.
932

          To þe hersum euensong of þe hyȝe tyde.
        

          Þe lorde loutes þerto, & þe lady als,
        

          In-to a comly closet coyntly ho entreȝ;
        

          Gawan glydeȝ ful gay, & gos þeder sone;
        
936

          Þe lorde laches hym by þe lappe, & ledeȝ hym to
          sytte,
        

          & couþly hym knoweȝ, & calleȝ hym his
          nome,
        

          & sayde he watȝ þe welcomest wyȝe of þe worlde;
        
The lord of the castle and Sir Gawayne sit
        together during service.

          & he hym þonkked þroly, & ayþer halched oþer.
        
940

          & seten soberly samen þe seruise-quyle;
        

          Þenne lyst þe lady to loke on þe knyȝt.
        
His wife, accompanied by her maids, leaves her
        seat.

          Þenne com ho of hir closet, with mony cler burdeȝ,
        

          Ho watȝ þe fayrest in felle, of flesche & of lyre,
        
944

          & of compas, & colour, & costes of alle oþer,
        
She appeared even fairer than Guenever.

          & wener þen Wenore, as þe wyȝe þoȝt.
        

          He ches þurȝ þe chaunsel, to cheryche þat hende;
        
An older lady (an ancient one she seemed) led her
        by the hand.

          An oþer lady hir lad bi þe lyft honde,
        
948

          Þat watȝ alder þen ho, an auncian hit semed,
        

          & heȝly honowred with haþeleȝ aboute.
        
Very unlike were these two.

          Bot yn-lyke on to loke þo ladyes were,
        
if the young one was fair the other was yellow,

          For if þe ȝonge watȝ ȝep, ȝolȝe watȝ þat
          oþer;
        
952

          Riche red on þat on rayled ay quere,
        
and had rough and wrinkled cheeks.

          Rugh ronkled chekeȝ þat oþer on rolled;
        

          Kerchofes of þat on wyth mony cler perleȝ
        
The younger had breast and throat "bare
        displayed."

          Hir brest & hir bryȝt þrote bare displayed,
        
956

          Schon schyrer þen snawe, þat scheder2 on hilleȝ;
        

          Þat oþer wyth a gorger watȝ gered ouer þe swyre,
        

          Chymbled ouer hir blake chyn with mylk-quyte
          vayles,
        
The ancient one exposed only her "black brows,"
        her two eyes,

          Hir frount folden in sylk, enfoubled ay quere,
        
960

          Toret & treieted with tryfleȝ aboute,
        
[Fol. 104.]nose, and naked lips, all sour
        and bleared.

          Þat noȝt watȝ bare of þat burde bot þe blake broȝes.
        

          Þe tweyne yȝen, & þe nase, þe naked lyppeȝ,
        

          & þose were soure to se, & sellyly blered;
        
964

          A mensk lady on molde mon may hir calle,
        

          for gode;
        
Her body was short and thick;

          Hir body watȝ schort & þik.
        
her buttocks broad and round.

          Hir buttokeȝ bay & brode,
        
968

          More lykker-wys on to lyk,
        

          Watȝ þat scho hade on lode.
        


1 MS. [claplayneȝ.] 2 schedes (?).
      


      XIX.
    


With permission of the lord,

          When Gawayn glyȝt on þat gay, þat graciously
          loked,
        

          Wyth leue laȝt of þe lorde he went hem aȝaynes;
        
Sir Gawayne salutes the elder, 972

          Þe alder he haylses, heldande ful lowe,
        

          Þe loueloker he lappeȝ a lyttel in armeȝ,
        
but the younger he kisses,

          He kysses hir comlyly, & knyȝtly he meleȝ;
        

          Þay kallen hym of a quoyntaunce, & he hit
          quyk askeȝ
        
and begs to be her servant. 976

          To be her seruaunt sothly, if hem-self lyked.
        

          Þay tan hym bytwene hem, wyth talkyng hym leden
        
To chamber all go,

          To chambre, to chemné, & chefly þay asken
        
where spices and wine are served.

          Spyceȝ, þat vn-sparely men speded hom to bryng,
        
980

          & þe wynne-lych wyne þer-with vche
          tyme.
        

          Þe lorde luflych aloft lepeȝ ful ofte,
        

          Mynned merthe to be made vpon mony syþeȝ.
        
The lord takes off his hood and places it on a
        spear.

          Hent heȝly of his hode, & on a spere henged,
        
984

          & wayned hom to wynne þe worchip þer-of,
        
He who makes most mirth is to win it.

          Þat most myrþe myȝt mene1 þat crystenmas whyle;
        

          "& i schal fonde, bi my fayth, to fylter wyth þe best,
        

          Er me wont þe wedeȝ, with help of my frendeȝ."
        
988

          Þus wyth laȝande loteȝ þe lorde hit tayt2
          makeȝ,
        
Night approaches, and then

          For to glade sir Gawayn with gomneȝ in
          halle
        

          þat nyȝt;
        

          Til þat hit watȝ tyme,
        
992

          Þe kyng comaundet lyȝt,
        
Sir Gawayne takes his leave and retires to rest.

          Sir Gawen his leue con nyme,
        

          & to his bed hym diȝt.
        


1 meue (?). 2 layt (?).
      


      XX.
    


On Christmas morn,

          On þe morne, as vch mon myneȝ þat tyme,
        
joy reigns in every dwelling in the world.
996

          [Þ]at dryȝtyn for oure destyné to deȝe watȝ borne,
        

          Wele waxeȝ in vche a won in worlde, for his sake;
        
So did it in the castle where our knight abode.

          So did hit þere on þat day, þurȝ dayntes mony;
        
[Fol. 104b.]

          Boþe at mes & at mele, messes ful quaynt
        
1000

          Derf men vpon dece drest of þe best.
        
The lord and "the old ancient wife" sit together.

          Þe olde auncian wyf heȝest ho sytteȝ;
        

          Þe lorde lufly her by lent, as I trowe;
        
Gawayne sits by the wife of his host.

          Gawan & þe gay burde to-geder þay seten,
        
1004

          Euen in-myddeȝ, as þe messe metely come;
        

          & syþen þurȝ al þe sale, as hem best semed,
        
It were too tedious to tell of the meat, the
        mirth, and the joy that abounded everywhere.

          Bi vche grome at his degre grayþely watȝ serued.
        

          Þer watȝ mete, þer watȝ myrþe, þer watȝ
          much ioye,
        
1008

          Þat for to telle þerof hit me tene were,
        

          & to poynte hit ȝet I pyned me parauenture;
        
Gawayne and his beautiful companion derive much
        comfort from each other's conversation.

          Bot ȝet I wot þat Wawen & þe wale burde
        

          Such comfort of her compaynye caȝten to-geder,
        
1012

          Þurȝ her dere dalyaunce of her derne wordeȝ,
        

          Wyth clene cortays carp, closed fro fylþe;
        

          & hor play watȝ passande vche prynce gomen,
        

          in vayres;
        
Trumpets and nakers give forth their sounds.
1016

          Trumpeȝ & nakerys,
        

          Much pypyng þer repayres,
        

          Vche mon tented hys,
        

          & þay two tented þayres.
        



      XXI.
    


Great was the joy for three days. 1020

          Much dut watȝ þer dryuen þat day & þat oþer,
        

          & þe þryd as þro þronge in þerafter;
        
St. John's-day was the last of the Christmas
        festival.

          Þe ioye of sayn Ioneȝ day watȝ gentyle to here,
        

          & watȝ þe last of þe layk, leudeȝ þer þoȝten.
        
1024

          Þer wer gestes to go vpon þe gray morne,
        

          For-þy wonderly þay woke, & þe wyn dronken,
        

          Daunsed ful dreȝly wyth dere caroleȝ;
        
On the morrow many of the guests took their
        departure from the castle.

          At þe last, when hit watȝ late, þay lachen her leue,
        
1028

          Vchon to wende on his way, þat watȝ wyȝe stronge.
        

          Gawan gef hym god-day, þe god mon hym lachcheȝ,
        

          Ledes hym to his awen chambre, þ[e] chymné bysyde,
        
Sir Gawayne is thanked by his host for the honour
        and pleasure of his visit.

          & þere he draȝeȝ hym on-dryȝe, & derely
          hym þonkkeȝ,
        
1032

          Of þe wynne worschip &1 he hym wayned
          hade,
        

          As to honour his hous on þat hyȝe tyde,
        

          & enbelyse his burȝ with his bele chere.
        

          "I-wysse sir, quyl I leue, me worþeȝ þe better,
        
[Fol. 105.] 1036

          Þat Gawayn hatȝ ben my gest, at Goddeȝ awen fest."
        

          "Grant merci2 sir," quod Gawayn, "in
          god fayth hit is yowreȝ,
        

          Al þe honour is your awen, þe heȝe kyng yow
          ȝelde;
        

          & I am wyȝe at your wylle, to worch youre hest,
        
1040

          As I am halden þer-to, in hyȝe & in loȝe,
        

          bi riȝt."
        
He endeavours to keep the knight at his court.

          Þe lorde fast can hym payne,
        

          To holde lenger þe knyȝt,
        
1044

          To hym answreȝ Gawayn,
        

          Bi non way þat he myȝt.
        


1 þat (?). 2 nerci, in MS.
      


      XXII.
    


He desires to know what had driven Sir Gawayne
        from Arthur's court before the end of the Christmas holidays.

          Then frayned þe freke ful fayre at him-seluen,
        

          Quat derne1 dede had hym dryuen, at þat dere tyme,
        
1048

          So kenly fro þe kyngeȝ kourt to kayre al his one,
        

          Er þe halidayeȝ holly were halet out of toun?
        
The knight replies that "a high errand and a
        hasty one" had forced him to leave the court.

          "For soþe sir," quod þe segge, "ȝe sayn bot þe
          trawþe
        

          A heȝe ernde & a hasty me hade fro þo woneȝ,
        
1052

          For I am sumned my selfe to sech to a place,
        

          I wot2 in worlde wheder warde to wende, hit to
          fynde;
        

          I nolde, bot if I hit negh myȝt on nwȝeres morne,
        

          For alle þe londe in-wyth Logres, so me oure lorde help!
        
1056

          For-þy, sir, þis enquest I require yow here,
        
He asks his host whether he has ever heard of the
        Green Chapel,

          Þat ȝe me telle with trawþe, if euer ȝe
          tale herde
        

          Of þe grene chapel, quere hit on grounde stondeȝ,
        

          & of þe knyȝt þat hit kepes, of colour of grene?
        
1060

          Þer watȝ stabled bi statut a steuen vus by-twene,
        
for he has to be there on New Year's-day.

          To mete þat mon at þat mere, ȝif I myȝt last;
        

          & of þat ilk nwȝere hot neked now wonteȝ,
        

          & I wolde loke on þat lede, if God me let wolde,
        
1064

          Gladloker, bi Goddeȝ sun, þen any god welde!
        

          For-þi, I-wysse, bi ȝowre wylle, wende me bi-houes,
        
He wonld as lief die as fail in his errand.

          Naf I now to busy bot bare þre dayeȝ,
        

          & me als fayn to falle feye as fayly of myyn ernde."
        
The prince tells Sir Gawayne that he will teach
        him the way. 1068

          Þenne laȝande quod þe lorde, "now leng þe by-houes,
        

          For I schal teche yow to þa[t] terme bi þe tymeȝ ende,
        

          Þe grene chapayle vpon grounde, greue yow no more;
        

          Bot ȝe schal be in yowre bed, burne, at þyn ese,
        
1072

          Quyle forth dayej, & ferk on pe fyrst of pe ȝere,
        
[Fol. 105b]

          & cum to þat merk at mydmorn, to make quat yow likeȝ
        

          in spenne;
        

          Dowelleȝ whyle new ȝeres daye,
        
1076

          & rys, & raykeȝ þenne,
        
The Green chapel is not more than two miles from
        the castle.

          Mon schal yow sette in waye,
        

          Hit is not two myle henne."
        


1 derue (?). 2 not (?).
      


      XXIII.
    


Then was Gawayne glad,

          Þenne watȝ Gawan ful glad, & gomenly he laȝed,—
        
1080

          "Now I þonk yow þryuandely þurȝ alle oþer þynge,
        
and consents to tarry awhile at the castle.

          Now acheued is my chaunce, I schal at your wylle
        

          Dowelle, & elleȝ do quat ȝe demen."
        

          Þenne sesed hym þe syre, & set hym bysyde,
        
The ladies are brought in to solace him.
1084

          Let þe ladieȝ be fette, to lyke hem þe better;
        

          Þer watȝ seme solace by hem-self stille;
        

          Þe lorde let for luf loteȝ so myry,
        

          As wyȝ þat wolde of his wyte, ne wyst quat he myȝt.
        
1088

          Þenne he carped to þe knyȝt, criande loude,
        
The lord of the castle asks the knight to grant
        him one request;

          "Ȝe han demed to do þe dede þat I bidde;
        

          Wyl ȝe halde þis hes here at þys oneȝ?"
        

          "Ȝe sir, for-soþe," sayd þe segge trwe,
        
1092

          "Whyl I byde in yowre borȝe, be bayn to ȝow[r]e
          hest."
        

          "For ȝe haf trauayled," quod þe tulk, "towen fro ferre,
        

          & syþen waked me wyth, ȝe arn not wel waryst,
        
That he will stay in his chamber during mass
        time,

          Nauþer of sostnaunce ne of slepe, soþly I knowe;
        
1096

          Ȝe schal lenge in your lofte, & lyȝe in
          your ese,
        
and then go to meat with his hostess.

          To morn quyle þe messe-quyle, & to mete wende,
        

          When ȝe wyl, wyth my wyf, þat wyth yow schal sitte,
        

          & comfort yow with compayny, til I to cort torne,
        
1100

          ȝe lende;
        

          & I schal erly ryse,
        

          On huntyng wyl I wende."
        
Gawayne accedes to his request.

          Gauayn granteȝ alle þyse,
        
1104

          Hym heldande, as þe hende.
        



      XXIV.
    


"Whatsoever," says the host, "I win in the wood
        shall be yours,

          "Ȝet firre," quod þe freke, "a forwarde we make;
        

          Quat-so-euer I wynne in þe wod, hit worþeȝ to youreȝ,
        
and what check you achieve shall be mine."

          & quat chek so ȝe acheue, chaunge me þer-forne;
        
1108

          Swete, swap we so, sware with trawþe,
        

          Queþer, leude, so lymp lere oþer better."
        

          "Bi God," quod Gawayn þe gode, "I grant þer-tylle,
        
[Fol. 106.]

          & þat yow lyst forto layke, lef hit me þynkes.
        
A bargain is made between them. 1112

          "Who bringeȝ vus þis beuerage, þis bargayn
          is maked:"
        

          So sayde þe lorde of þat lede; þay laȝed vchone,
        

          Þay dronken, & daylyeden, & dalten vntyȝtel,1


          Þise lordeȝ & ladyeȝ, quyle þat hem lyked;
        
1116

          & syþen with frenkysch fare & fele fayre loteȝ
        

          Þay stoden, & stemed, & stylly speken,
        

          Kysten ful comlyly, & kaȝten her leue.
        
Night approaches and each "to his bed was brought
        at the last."

          With mony leude ful lyȝt, & lemande torches,
        
1120

          Vche burne to his bed watȝ broȝt at þe laste,
        

          ful softe;
        

          To bed ȝet er þay ȝede,
        

          Recorded couenaunteȝ ofte;
        
1124

          Þe olde lorde of þat leude,2


          Cowþe wel halde layk a-lofte.
        


1 vntyl nyȝte (?). 2 lede (?).
      


      [FYTTE THE THIRD.]
    

      I.
    


Before day-break folks uprise,

          Ful erly bifore þe day þe folk vp-rysen,
        

          Gestes þat go wolde, hor gromeȝ þay calden,
        
saddle their horses, and truss their mails.
1128

          & þay busken vp bilyue, blonkkeȝ to sadel,
        

          Tyffen he[r] takles, trussen her males,
        

          Richen hem þe rychest, to ryde alle arayde,
        

          Lepen vp lyȝtly, lachen her brydeles,
        
Each goes where it pleases him best. 1132

          Vche wyȝe on his way, þer hym wel lyked.
        
The noble lord of the land arrays himself for
        riding.

          Þe leue lorde of þe londe watȝ not þe last,
        

          A-rayed for þe rydyng, with renkkeȝ ful
          mony;
        
He eats a sop hastily and goes to mass.

          Ete a sop hastyly, when he hade herde masse,
        
1136

          With bugle to bent felde he buskeȝ by-lyue;
        
Before day-light he and his men are on their
        horses.

          By þat þat any day-lyȝt lemed vpon erþe,
        

          He with his haþeles on hyȝe horsses weren.
        
Then the hounds are called out and coupled.

          Þenne þise cacheres þat couþe, cowpled hor houndeȝ,
        
1140

          Vnclosed þe kenel dore, & calde hem þer-oute,
        
Three short notes are blown by the bugles.

          Blwe bygly in bugleȝ þre bare mote;
        

          Braches bayed þerfore, & breme noyse maked,
        
A hundred hunters join in the chase.

          & þay chastysed, & charred, on chasyng þat went;
        
1144

          A hundreth of hunteres, as I haf herde telle,
        

          of þe best;
        
To the stations the "fewters" go,

          To trystors vewters ȝod,
        

          Couples huntes of kest,
        
[Fol. 106b.] 1148

          Þer ros for blasteȝ gode,
        
and the dogs are cast off.

          Gret rurd in þat forest.
        



      II.
    


Roused by the clamour the deer rush to the
        heights,

          At þe fyrst quethe of þe quest quaked þe wylde;
        

          Der drof in þe dale, doted for drede,
        
1152

          Hiȝed to þe hyȝe, bot heterly þay were
        
but are soon driven back.

          Restayed with þe stablye, þat stoutly ascryed;
        
The harts and bucks are allowed to pass,

          Þay let þe hertteȝ haf þe gate, with þe hyȝe
          hedes,
        

          Þe breme bukkeȝ also, with hor brode paumeȝ;
        
1156

          For þe fre lorde hade de-fende in fermysoun tyme,
        

          Þat þer schulde no mon mene1 to þe male dere.
        
but the hinds and does are driven back to the
        shades.

          Þe hindeȝ were halden in, with hay &
          war,
        

          Þe does dryuen with gret dyn to þe depe sladeȝ;
        
1160

          Þer myȝt mon se, as þay slypte, slentyng of arwes,
        
As they fly they are shot by the bowmen.

          At vche [þat] wende vnder wande wapped a flone,
        

          Þat bigly bote on þe broun, with ful brode hedeȝ,
        
The hounds and the hunters, with a loud cry,
        follow in pursuit.

          What! þay brayen, & bleden, bi bonkkeȝ þay deȝen.
        
1164

          & ay rachches in a res radly hem folȝes,
        

          Huntereȝ wyth hyȝe horne hasted hem after,
        
Those that escaped the arrows are killed by the
        hounds.

          Wyth such a crakkande kry, as klyffes haden brusten;
        

          What wylde so at-waped wyȝes þat schotten,
        
1168

          Watȝ al to-raced & rent, at þe resayt.
        

          Bi þay were tened at þe hyȝe, & taysed to þe wattreȝ,
        

          Þe ledeȝ were so lerned at þe loȝe trysteres,
        

          & þe gre-houndeȝ so grete, þat geten hem bylyue,
        
1172

          & hem to fylched, as fast as frekeȝ myȝt loke,
        

          þer ryȝt.
        
The lord waxes joyful in the chase,

          Þe lorde for blys abloy
        

          Ful oft con launce & lyȝt,
        
which lasted till the approach of night.
1176

          & drof þat day wyth Ioy
        

          Thus to þe derk nyȝt.
        


1 meue (?).
      


      III.
    


All this time Gawayne lies a-bed.

          Þus laykeȝ þis lorde by lynde wodeȝ eueȝ,
        

          & G. þe god mon, in gay bed lygeȝ,
        
under "coverture full clear". 1180

          Lurkkeȝ quyl þe day-lyȝt lemed on þe wowes,
        

          Vnder couertour ful clere, cortyned aboute;
        

          & as in slomeryng he slode, sleȝly he
          herde
        
He hears a noise at his door.

          A littel dyn at his dor, & derfly vpon;
        
1184

          & he heueȝ vp his hed out of þe cloþes,
        
[Fol. 107.]

          A corner of þe cortyn he caȝt vp a lyttel,
        

          & wayteȝ warly þider-warde, quat hit be myȝt.
        
A lady, the loveliest to behold, enters softly.

          Hit watȝ þe ladi, loflyest to be-holde,
        
1188

          Þat droȝ þe dor after hir ful dernly1 &
          stylle,
        
She approaches the bed.

          & boȝed to-warde þe bed; & þe burne schamed.
        

          & layde hym doun lystyly, & let as he slepte.
        
Gawayne pretends to be asleep.

          & ho stepped stilly. & stel to his bedde,
        
The lady casts up the curtain and sits on the
        bedside. 1192

          Kest vp þe cortyn, & creped with-inne,
        

          & set hir ful softly on þe bed-syde,
        

          & lenged þere selly longe, to loke quen he wakened.
        

          Þe lede lay lurked a ful longe quyle,
        
Gawayne has much wonder thereat. 1196

          Compast in his concience to quat þat cace myȝt
        

          Mene oþer amount, to meruayle hym þoȝt;
        

          Bot ȝet he sayde in hym-self, "more semly hit were
        

          To aspye wyth my spelle [in] space quat ho wolde."
        
He rouses himself up, 1200

          þen he wakenede, & wroth, & to hir warde torned,
        
unlocks his eyes, and looks as if he were
        astonished.

          & vn-louked his yȝe-lyddeȝ, & let as hym
          wondered,
        

          & sayned hym, as bi his saȝe þe sauer to
          worthe,
        

          with hande;
        
1204

          Wyth chynne & cheke ful swete,
        

          Boþe quit & red in-blande,
        

          Ful lufly con ho lete,
        

          Wyth lyppeȝ smal laȝande.
        


1 deruly (?).
      


      IV.
    


"Good morrow", says the lady, "ye are a careless
        sleeper to let one enter thus. 1208

          "God moroun, sir Gawayn," sayde þat fayr lady,
        

          "Ȝe ar a sleper vn-slyȝe, þat mon may slyde
          hider;
        

          Now ar ȝe tan astyt, bot true vus may schape,
        
I shall bind you in your bed, of that be ye
        sure."

          I schal bynde yow in your bedde, þat be ȝe trayst:"
        
1212

          Al laȝande þe lady lanced þo bourdeȝ.
        
"Good morrow," says the knight, "I am well
        pleased to be at your service;

          "Goud moroun g[aye],"1 quod Gawayn þe blyþe,
        

          "Me schal worþe at your wille, & þat me wel lykeȝ,
        

          For I ȝelde me ȝederly, & ȝeȝe after grace,
        
1216

          & þat is þe best, be my dome, for me by-houeȝ nede;"
        

          & þus he bourded a-ȝayn with mony a blyþe laȝter.
        
but permit me to rise and dress myself."

          "Bot wolde ȝe, lady louely, þen leue me grante,
        

          & de-prece your prysoun, & pray hym to
          ryse,
        
1220

          I wolde boȝe of þis bed, & busk me better,
        

          I schulde keuer þe more comfort to karp yow wyth."
        
[Fol. 107b]"Nay, beau sir," said that sweet
        one,

          "Nay, for soþe, beau sir," sayd þat swete,
        

          "Ȝe schal not rise of your bedde, I rych yow better,
        
"I shall hold talk with you here. 1224

          I schal happe yow here þat oþer half als,
        

          & syþen karp wyth my knyȝt þat I kaȝt haue;
        
I know well that you are Gawayne that all the
        woild worships.

          For I wene wel, Iwysse, sir Wawen ȝe are,
        

          Þat alle þe worlde worchipeȝ, quere-so ȝe ride;
        
1228

          Your honour, your hendelayk is hendely praysed
        
We are by ourselves;

          With lordeȝ, wyth ladyes, with alle
          þat lyf bere.
        

          & now ȝe ar here, iwysse, & we bot oure one;
        
My lord and his men are far off.

          "My lorde & his ledeȝ ar on lenþe faren,
        
Other men are in their beds, so are my maidens.
1232

          Oþer burneȝ in her bedde, & my burdeȝ als,
        
The door is safely closed.

          Þe dor drawen, & dit with a derf haspe;
        
Since I have him in house that every one likes, I
        shall use my time well while it lasts.

          & syþen I haue in þis hous hym þat al lykeȝ,
        

          I schal ware my whyle wel, quyl hit lasteȝ,
        
1236

          with tale;
        
Ye are welcome to my body.

          Ȝe ar welcum to my cors,
        

          Yowre awen won to wale,
        

          Me be-houeȝ of fyne force,
        
I shall be your servant." 1240

          Your seruaunt be & schale."
        


1 This word is illegible in the MS.
      


      V.
    



          "In god fayth," quod Gawayn, "gayn hit me þynkkeȝ,
        
"I am unworthy," says Sir Gawayne, "to reach to
        such reverence as ye rehearse.

          Þaȝ I be not now he þat ȝe of speken;
        

          To reche to such reuerence as ȝe reherce here
        
1244

          I am wyȝe vn-worþy, I wot wel my-seluen;
        

          Bi God, I were glad, & yow god þoȝt,
        
I shall be glad, however, to please you by word,
        or service."

          At saȝe oþer at seruyce þat I sette myȝt
        

          To þe plesaunce of your prys, hit were a pure ioye."
        
1248

          "In god fayth, sir Gawayn," quod þe gay lady,
        

          "Þe prys & þe prowes þat pleseȝ al oþer,
        

          If I hit lakked, oþer set at lyȝt, hit were littel daynté;
        
"There are ladies," says his visitor, "who would
        prefer thy company

          Bot hit ar ladyes in-noȝe, þat leuer wer nowþe
        
1252

          Haf þe hende in hor holde, as I þe habbe here,
        

          To daly witt derely your daynté wordeȝ,
        

          Keuer hem comfort, & colen her careȝ,
        
to much of the gold that they possess."

          Þen much of þe garysourn oþer golde þat1
          þay hauen;
        
1256

          Bot I louue2 þat ilk lorde þat þe lyfte haldeȝ,
        

          I haf hit holly in my honde þat al desyres,
        

          þurȝe grace."
        

          Scho made hym so gret chere,
        
[Fol. 108.] 1260

          Þat watȝ so fayr of face,
        
The knight answers the lady's questions.

          Þe knyȝt with speches skere,
        

          A[n]swared to vche a cace.
        


1 MS. þat þat. 2 louie or loune (?).
      


      VI.
    


Gawayne tells her that he prefers her
        conversation before that of all others.

          "Madame," quod þe myry mon, "Mary yow ȝelde,
        
1264

          For I haf founden, in god fayth, yowre fraunchis
          nobele,
        

          & oþer ful much of oþer folk fongen hor dedeȝ;
        

          Bot þe daynté þat þay delen for my disert nysen,
        

          Hit is þe worchyp of your-self, þat noȝt hot wel conneȝ."
        
The lady declares by Mary, 1268

          "Bi Mary," quod þe menskful, "me þynk hit anoþer;
        

          For were I worth al þe wone of wymmen alyue,
        

          & al þe wele of þe worlde were in my honde,
        
that were she about to choose her a lord,

          & I schulde chepen & chose, to cheue me a lorde,
        
1272

          For þe costes þat I haf knowen vpun þe knyȝt here,
        

          Of bewté, & debonerté, & blyþe semblaunt,
        
she would select Gawayne before any man on earth.

          & þat I haf er herkkened, & halde hit here trwee,
        

          Þer schulde no freke vpon folde bifore yow be chosen."
        
1276

          "I-wysse, worþy," quod þe wyȝe, "ȝe haf waled wel
          better,
        
Gawayne tells her that he will become her own
        knight and faithful servant.

          Bot I am proude of þe prys þat ȝe put on me,
        

          & soberly your seruaunt my souerayn I holde
          yow,
        

          & yowre knyȝt I be-com, & Kryst yow for-ȝelde."
        
1280

          Þus þay meled of much-quat, til myd-morn paste,
        

          & ay þe lady let lyk, a1 hym loued mych;
        
The remembrance of his adventure prevents him
        from thinking of love.

          Þe freke ferde with defence, & feted ful fayre.
        

          Þaȝ I were burde bryȝtest, þe burde in mynde hade,
        
1284

          Þe lasse luf in his lode, for lur þat he soȝt,
        

          boute hone;
        

          Þe dunte þat schulde2 hym deue,
        

          & nedeȝ hit most be done;
        
The lady takes leave of Sir Gawayne. 1288

          Þe lady þenn spek of leue.
        

          He granted hir ful sone.
        


1 and (?) 2 sclulde, in MS.
      


      VII.
    


With a laughing glance, she says,

          Þenne ho gef hym god-day, & wyth a glent laȝed.
        

          & as ho stod, ho stonyed hym wyth ful stor wordeȝ:
        
"I am doubtful whether ye be Gawayne.
1292

          "Now he þat spedeȝ vche spech, þis disport ȝelde yow!
        

          Bot þat ȝe be Gawan, hit gotȝ in mynde."
        

          "Quer-fore?" quod þe freke, & freschly he askeȝ,
        

          Ferde lest he hade fayled in fourme of his castes;
        
1296

          Bot þe burde hym blessed, & bi þis skyl sayde,
        
[Fol. 108b.]

          "So god as Gawayn gaynly is halden,
        

          & cortaysye is closed so clene in hym-seluen,
        
Were it he, surely, ere this, he would have
        craved a kiss."

          Couth not lyȝtly haf lenged so long wyth a lady,
        
1300

          Bot he had craued a cosse, bi his courtaysye,
        

          Bi sum towch of summe tryfle, at sum taleȝ
          ende."
        
"I shall kiss," says the knight, "at your
        commandment."

          Þen quod Wowen, "I-wysse, worþe as yow lykeȝ,
        

          I schal kysse at your comaundement, as a knyȝt
          falleȝ,
        
1304

          & fire1 lest he displese yow, so2 plede hit
          no more."
        
With that the lady catches him in her arms and
        kisses him.

          Ho comes nerre with þat, & cacheȝ hym in
          armeȝ,
        

          Louteȝ luflych adoun, & þe leude kysseȝ;
        

          Þay comly bykennen to Kryst ayþer oþer;
        
1308

          Ho dos hir forth at þe dore, with-outen dyn more.
        

          & he ryches hym to ryse, & rapes hym sone,
        
Gawayne then rises and goes to mass.

          Clepes to his chamberlayn, choses his wede,
        

          Boȝeȝ forth, quen he watȝ boun, blyþely to
          masse,
        
1312

          & þenne he meued to his mete, þat menskly hym
          keped,
        
He makes mirth all day till the moon rises,

          & made myry al day til þe mone rysed,
        

          with game;
        

          With3 neuer freke fayrer fonge,
        
between the "two dames," the older and the
        younger. 1316

          Bitwene two so dyngne dame,
        

          Þe alder & þe ȝonge,
        

          Much solace set þay same.
        


1 fere (?). 2 fo, in MS. 3 Was (?) Nas
        (?).
      


      VIII.
    


Meanwhile the lord of the land and his men hunt
        in woods and heaths.

          And ay þe lorde of þe londe is lent on his gamneȝ,
        
1320

          To hunt in holteȝ & heþe, at hyndeȝ
          barayne,
        

          Such a sowme he þer slowe bi þat þe sunne heldet,
        

          Of dos & of oþer dere, to deme were wonder.
        

          Þenne fersly þay flokked in folk at þe laste,
        
Quickly of the killed a "quarry" they
        make. 1324

          & quykly of þe quelled dere a querré þay maked;
        

          Þe best boȝed þerto, with burneȝ in-noghe,
        
Then they set about breaking the deer.

          Gedered þe grattest of gres þat þer were,
        

          & didden hem derely vndo, as þe dede askeȝ;
        
They take away the assay or fat,
1328

          Serched hem at þe asay, summe þat þer were,
        

          Two fyngeres þay fonde of þe fowlest of alle;
        
then they slit the slot and remove the erber.

          Syþen þay slyt þe slot, sesed þe erber,
        
They afterwards rip the four limbs and rend off
        the hide.

          Schaued wyth a scharp knyf, & þe schyre knitten;
        
1332

          Syþen rytte þay þe foure lymmes, & rent of þe hyde,
        
They next open the belly

          Þen brek þay þe bale, þe baleȝ out token,
        
[Fol. 109.]and take out the bowels.

          Lystily forlancyng, & bere of þe knot;
        

          Þay gryped to þe gargulun, & grayþely departed
        
They then separate the weasand from the
        windhole and throw out the guts. 1336

          Þe wesaunt fro þe wynt-hole, & walt out þe gutteȝ;
        

          Þen scher þay out þe schuldereȝ with her
          scharp knyueȝ,
        
The shoulders are cut out, and the breast divided
        into halves.

          Haled hem by a lyttel hole, to haue hole sydes;
        

          Siþen britned þay þe brest, & brayden hit in twynne,
        
1340

          & eft at þe gargulun bigyneȝ on þenne,
        
The numbles are next removed.

          Ryueȝ hit vp radly, ryȝt to þe byȝt,
        

          Voydeȝ out þe a-vanters, & verayly þerafter


          Alle þe rymeȝ by þe rybbeȝ radly þay lance;
        
1344

          So ryde þay of by resoun bi þe rygge boneȝ,
        

          Euenden to þe haunche, þat henged alle samen,
        

          & heuen hit vp al hole, & hwen hit of þere,
        

          & þat þayneme for þe noumbles, bi nome as I trowe,
        
1348

          bi kynde;
        
By the fork of the thighs,

          Bi þe byȝt al of þe þyȝes,
        

          Þe lappeȝ þay lance bi-hynde,
        
the flaps are hewn in two by the backbone.

          To hewe hit in two þay hyȝes,
        
1352

          Bi þe bak-bon to vnbynde.
        



      IX.
    


After this the head and neck are cut off, and the
        sides severed from the chine.

          Boþe þe hede & þe hals þay hwen of þenne,
        

          & syþen sunder þay þe sydeȝ swyft fro þe chyne,
        

          & þe corbeles fee þay kest in a greue;1

1356

          Þenn þurled þay ayþer þik side þurȝ, bi þe rybbe,
        

          & henged þenne a[y]þer bi hoȝes of þe fourcheȝ,
        

          Vche freke for his fee, as falleȝ forto haue.
        

          Vpon a felle of þe fayre best, fede þay þayr houndes,
        
With the liver, lights and paunches, they feed
        the hounds. 1360

          Wyth þe lyuer & þe lyȝteȝ, þe leþer of þe pauncheȝ,
        

          & bred baþed in blod, blende þer amongeȝ;
        

          Baldely þay blw prys, bayed þayr rachcheȝ,
        
Then they make for home.

          Syþen fonge þay her flesche folden to home,
        
1364

          Strakande ful stoutly mony stif moteȝ.
        

          Bi þat þe daylyȝt watȝ done, þe douthe watȝ al wonen
        

          In-to þe comly castel, þer þe knyȝt bideȝ
        

          ful stille;
        
1368

          Wyth blys & bryȝt fyr bette,
        

          Þe lord is comen þer-tylle,
        
Gawayne goes out to meet his host.

          When Gawayn wyth hym mette,
        

          Þer watȝ bot wele at wylle.
        


1 grene (?).
      


      X.
    


[Fol. 109b.]The lord commands all his
        household to assemble, 1372

          Thenne comaunded þe lorde in þat sale to
          samen alle þe meny,
        

          Boþe þe ladyes on loghe to lyȝt with her
          burdes,
        
and the venison to be brought before him.

          Bi-fore alle þe folk on þe flette, frekeȝ he beddeȝ
        

          Verayly his venysoun to fech hym byforne;
        
He calls Gawayne, 1376

          & al godly in gomen Gaway[n] he called,
        

          Techeȝ hym to þe tayles of ful tayt bestes,
        

          Scheweȝ hym þe schyree grece schorne vpon rybbes.
        
and asks him whether he does not deserve much
        praise for his success in the chase.

          "How payeȝ yow þis play? haf I prys wonnen?
        
1380

          Haue I þryuandely þonk þurȝ my craft serued?"
        

          "Ȝe I-wysse," quod þat oþer wyȝe, "here is
          wayth fayrest
        
On the knight expressing himself satisfied, he is
        told to take the whole according to a former agreement between them.

          Þat I seȝ þis seuen ȝere in sesoun of wynter."
        

          "& al I gif yow, Gawayn," quod þe gome þenne,
        
1384

          "For by a-corde of couenaunt ȝe craue hit as your
          awen."
        

          "Þis is soth," quod þe segge, "I say yow þatilke,
        

          &1 I haf worthyly þis woneȝ wyth-inne,
        
Gawayne gives the knight a comely kiss in return.

          I-wysse with as god wylle hit worþeȝ to ȝoureȝ."
        
1388

          He hasppeȝ his fayre hals his armeȝ wyth-inne,
        

          & kysses hym as comlyly as he2 couþe awyse:
        

          "Tas yow þere my cheuicaunce, I cheued no more,
        

          I wowche hit saf fynly, þaȝ feler hit were."
        
1392

          "Hit is god," quod þe god mon, "grant mercy þerfore,
        
His host desires to know where he has gotten such
        weal.

          Hit may be such, hit is þe better, &1 ȝe me
          breue wolde
        

          Where ȝe wan þis ilk wele, biwytte of hor3 seluen?"
        
As this does not enter into the covenant, he gets
        no answer to his question.

          "Þat watȝ not forward," quod he, "frayst me no more,
        
1396

          For ȝe haftan þat yow tydeȝ, traweȝe non oþer


          ȝe mowe."
        

          Þay laȝed, & made hem blyþe,
        
They then proceed to supper, where were dainties
        new and enough.

          Wyth loteȝ þat were to lowe,
        
1400

          To soper þay ȝede asswyþe,
        

          Wyth dayntes nwe in-nowe.
        


1 And = an. 2 ho, in MS. 3 your (?).
      


      XI.
    


By the hearth they sit.

          And syþen by þe chymné in chamber þay seten.
        
Wine is carried round.

          Wyȝeȝ þe walle wyn weȝed to hem oft,
        
1404

          & efte in her bourdyng þay bayþen in þe morn,
        

          To fylle þe same forwardeȝ þat þay by-fore maden,
        
Again Sir Gawayne and his host renew their
        agreement.

          Þat chaunce so bytydeȝ hor cheuysaunce to chaunge,
        

          What nweȝ so þay nome, at naȝt quen þay metten

1408

          Þay acorded of þe couenaunteȝ byfore þe court alle;
        
[Fol. 110.]

          Þe beuerage watȝ broȝt forth in bourde at þat tyme;
        
Then they take leave of each other and hasten to
        bed.

          Þenne þay louelych leȝten leue at þe last,
        

          Vche burne to his bedde busked bylyue.
        
Scarce had the cock cackled thrice when the lord
        was up. 1412

          Bi þat þe coke hade croweȝ1 & cakled bot þryse,
        

          Þe lorde watȝ lopen of his bedde, [&] þe leudeȝ vch one,
        

          So þat þe mete & þe masse watȝ metely delyuered;
        

          Þe douthe dressed to þe wod, er any day sprenged,
        
1416

          to chace;
        
With his hunters and horns they pursue the chase.

          Heȝ with hunte & horneȝ,
        

          Þurȝ playneȝ þay passe in space,
        

          Vn-coupled among þo þorneȝ,
        
1420

          Racheȝ þat ran on race.
        


1 crowed (?).
      


      XII.
    


The hunters cheer on the hounds,

          Sone þay calle of a quest in aker syde,
        

          Þe hunt re-hayted þe houndeȝ, þat hit fyrst mynged,
        
which fall to the scent forty at once.

          Wylde wordeȝ hym warp wyth a wrast noyce;
        
1424

          Þe howndeȝ þat hit herde, hastid þider swyþe,
        

          & fellen as fast to þe fuyt, fourty at ones;
        

          Þenne such a glauerande glam of gedered rachcheȝ
        

          Ros, þat þe rochereȝ rungen aboute;
        
1428

          Huntereȝ hem hardened with horne & wyth
          muthe.
        
All come together by the side of a cliff.

          Þen al in a semblé sweyed to-geder,
        

          Bitwene a flosche in þat fryth, & a foo cragge;
        

          In a knot, bi a clyffe, at þe kerre syde,
        
1432

          Þer as þe rogh rocher vn-rydely watȝ fallen,
        

          [Þay] ferden to þe fyndyng, & frekeȝ hem after;
        
They look about on all sides,

          Þay vmbe-kesten þe knarre & þe knot boþe.
        

          Wyȝeȝ, whyl þay wysten wel wyt inne hem hit
          were,
        
1436

          Þe best þat þer breued watȝ wyth þe blod houndeȝ.
        
and beat on the bushes.

          Þenne þay beten on þe buskeȝ, & bede hym vp
          ryse,
        

          & he vnsoundyly out soȝt seggeȝ ouer-þwert,
        
Out there rushes a fierce wild boar,

          On þe sellokest swyn swenged out þere,
        
1440

          Long sythen for1 þe sounder þat wiȝt for-olde,
        

          For he watȝ b[este &] bor alþer grattest,
        

          [And eue]re quen he gronyed, þenne greued mony,
        
At the first thrust he fells three to the ground.

          For [þre a]t þe fyrst þrast he þryȝt to þe erþe,
        
1444

          & [sped hym] forth good sped, boute spyt more,
        

          [Ande þay] halowed hyghe ful hyȝe & hay! hay! cryed
        
[Fol. 110b.]

          Haden horneȝ to mouþe heterly rechated;
        
Full quickly the hunters pursue him.

          Mony watȝ þe myry mouthe of men & of houndeȝ,
        
1448

          Þat buskkeȝ after þis bor, with bost &
          wyth noyse,
        

          To quelle;
        

          Ful oft he bydeȝ þe baye,
        

          & maymeȝ þe mute Inn-melle,
        
However, he attacks the hounds, causing them to
        yowl and yell. 1452

          He hurteȝ of þe houndeȝ, & þay
        

          Ful ȝomerly ȝaule & ȝelle.
        


1 fro (?).
      


      XIII.
    


The bowmen send their arrows after this wild
        swine,

          Schalkeȝ to schote at hym schowen to þenne,
        

          Haled to hym of her areweȝ, hitten hym oft;
        
1456

          Bot þe poynteȝ payred at þe pyth þat pyȝt in
          his scheldeȝ,
        

          & þe barbeȝ of his browe bite non wolde,
        
but they glide off shivered in pieces.

          Þaȝ þe schauen schaft schyndered in peceȝ,
        

          Þe hede hypped aȝayn, were-so-euer hit hitte;
        
Enraged with the blows, 1460

          Bot quon þe dynteȝ hym dered of her dryȝe strokeȝ,
        

          Þen, brayn-wod for bate, on burneȝ he raseȝ,
        
he attacks the hunters.

          Hurteȝ hem ful heterly þer he forth hyȝeȝ,
        

          & mony arȝed þerat, & on-lyte droȝen.
        
1464

          Bot þe lorde on a lyȝt horce launces hym after,
        
The lord of the land blows his bugle,

          As burne bolde vpon bent his bugle he bloweȝ,
        

          He rechated, & r[ode]1 þurȝ roneȝ ful þyk,
        

          Suande þis wy[ld]e swyn til þe sunne schafted.
        
and pursues the boar. 1468

          Þis day wyth þis ilk dede þay dryuen on þis wyse,
        

          Whyle oure luflych lede lys in his bedde,
        
All this time Gawayne lies a-bed.

          Gawayn grayþely at home, in gereȝ ful ryche
        

          of hewe;
        
1472

          Þe lady noȝt forȝate,
        

          Com to hym to salue,
        

          Ful erly ho watȝ hym ate,
        

          His mode forto remwe.
        


1 The MS. is here almost illegible.
      


      XIV.
    


The lady of the castle again visits Sir Gawayne.
1476

          Ho commes to þe cortyn, & at þe knyȝt totes,
        

          Sir Wawen her welcumed worþy on fyrst,
        

          & ho hym ȝeldeȝ aȝayn, ful ȝerne of hir
          wordeȝ,
        
Softly she sits by his side,

          Setteȝ hir sof[t]ly by his syde, & swyþely ho laȝeȝ,
        
1480

          & wyth a luflych loke ho layde1 hym þyse wordeȝ:
        

          "Sir, ȝif ȝe be Wawen, wonder me þynkkeȝ,
        

          Wyȝe þat is so wel wrast alway to god,
        

          & conneȝ not of compaynye þe costeȝ vnder-take,
        
[Fol. 111] 1484

          & if mon kennes yow hom to knowe, ȝe kest hom of your
          mynde;
        
and tells the knight that he has forgotten what
        she taught him the day before.

          Þou hatȝ for-ȝeten ȝederly þat ȝisterday I
          taȝtte
        

          alder-truest token of talk þat I cowþe."
        

          "What is þat?" quod þe wyghe, "I-wysse I wot neuer,
        
1488

          If hit be sothe þat ȝe breue, þe blame is myn awen."
        
"I taught you of kissing," she says, "that
        becomes every knight."

          "Ȝet I kende yow of kyssyng," quod þe clere þenne,
        

          "Quere-so countenaunce is couþe, quikly to clayme,
        

          Þat bicumes vche a knyȝt, þat cortaysy vses."
        
1492

          "Do way," quod þat derf mon, "my dere, þat speche,
        
Gawayne says that he must not take that which is
        forbidden.

          For þat durst I not do, lest I denayed were,
        

          If I were werned, I were wrang I-wysse, ȝif I profered."
        

          "Ma fay," quod þe mere wyf, "ȝe may not be werned,
        
He is told that he is strong enough to enforce
        it. 1496

          Ȝe ar stif in-noghe to constrayne wyth strenkþe,
          ȝif yow lykeȝ,
        

          Ȝif any were so vilanous þat yow denaye2
          wolde."
        

          "Ȝe, be God," quod Gawayn, "good is your speche,
        

          Bot þrete is vn-þryuande in þede þer I lende,
        
The knight replies that every gift is worthless
        that is not given willingly. 1500

          & vche gift þat is geuen not with goud wylle;
        

          I am at your comaundement, to kysse quen yow lykeȝ,
        

          Ȝe may lach quen yow lyst, & leue quen yow þynkkeȝ,
        

          in space."
        
The lady stoops down and kisses him. 1504

          Þe lady louteȝ a-doun,
        

          & comlyly kysses his face,
        

          Much speche þay þer expoun,
        

          Of druryes greme & grace.
        


1 sayde (?). 2 de vaye, in MS.
      


      XV.
    


"I would learn," she says, "why you, who are so
        young and active, 1508

          "I woled1 wyt at yow, wyȝe," þat worþy þer sayde,
        

          "& yow wrathed not þer-wyth, what were þe skylle,
        

          Þat so ȝong & so ȝepe, as ȝe [ar] at þis tyme,
        

          So cortayse, so knyȝtyly, as ȝe ar knowen oute,
        
so skilled in the true sport of love,
1512

          & of alle cheualry to chose, þe chef þyng a-losed,
        

          Is2 þe lel layk of luf, þe lettrure of armes;
        

          F[or] to telle of þis tenelyng of þis trwe knyȝteȝ,
        

          Hit is þe tytelet, token, & tyxt of her werkkeȝ,
        
1516

          How le[des] for her lele luf hor lyueȝ han auntered,
        

          Endured for her drury dulful stoundeȝ,
        

          & after wenged with her walour &
          voyded her care,
        
and so renowned a knight,

          & broȝt blysse in-to boure, with bountees
          hor awen.
        
1520

          & ȝe ar knyȝt com-lokest kyd of your elde,
        
[Fol. 111b.]

          Your worde & your worchip walkeȝ ay quere,
        

          & I haf seten by your-self here sere twyes,
        
have never talked to me of love.

          Ȝet herde I neuer of your hed helde no wordeȝ
        
1524

          Þat euer longed to luf, lasse ne more;
        
You ought to show a young thing like me some
        token of 'true-love's crafts.'

          & ȝe, þat ar so cortays & coynt of your
          hetes,
        

          Oghe to a ȝonke þynk ȝern to schewe,
        

          & teche sum tokeneȝ of trweluf craftes.
        
1528

          Why ar ȝe lewed, þat alle þe los weldeȝ,
        

          Oþer elles ȝe demen me to dille, your dalyaunce
          to herken?
        

          for schame!
        

          I com hider sengel, & sitte,
        
1532

          To lerne at yow sum game,
        
So teach me of your 'wit' while my lord is from
        home."

          Dos, techeȝ me of your wytte,
        

          Whil my lorde is fro hame."
        


1 wolde (?). 2 In (?).
      


      XVI.
    


"It is a great pleasure to me," says Sir Gawayne,
        "to hear you talk,

          "In goud fayþe," quod Gawayn, "God yow forȝelde,
        
1536

          Gret is þe gode gle, & gomen to me huge,
        

          Þat so worþy as ȝe wolde wynne hidere,
        

          & pyne yow with so pouer a mon, as play wyth
          your knyȝt,
        

          With any skynneȝ countenaunce, hit keuereȝ
          me ese;
        
but I cannot undertake the task to expound
        true-love and tales of arms. 1540

          Bot to take þe toruayle1 to my-self, to trwluf expoun,
        

          & towche þe temeȝ of tyxt, & taleȝ of armeȝ,
        

          To yow þat, I wot wel, weldeȝ more slyȝt
        

          Of þat art, bi þe half, or a hundreth of seche
        
1544

          As I am, oþer euer schal, in erde þer I leue,
        

          Hit were a fole fele-folde, my fre, by my trawþe.
        
I will, however, act according to your will,

          I wolde yowre wylnyng worche at my myȝt,
        

          As I am hyȝly bihalden, & euer-more wylle
        
and ever be your servant." 1548

          Be seruaunt to your-seluen, so saue me dryȝtyn!"
        

          Þus hym frayned þat fre, & fondet hym ofte,
        

          Forto haf wonnen hym to woȝe, what-so scho þoȝt
          elleȝ,
        
Thus Gawayne defends himself.

          Bot he de fended hym so fayr, þat no faut semed,
        
1552

          Ne non euel on nawþer halue, nawþer þay wysten,
        

          bot blysse;
        

          Þay laȝed & layked longe,
        

          At þe last scho con hym kysse,
        
The lady having kissed the knight, takes leave of
        him. 1556

          Hir leue fayre con scho fonge,
        

          & went hir waye Iwysse.
        


1 tornayle (?).
      


      XVII.
    


Gawayne rises, hears mass, and then dines.

          Then ruþes hym þe renk, & ryses to þe masse,
        
[Fol. 112.]

          & siþen hor diner watȝ dyȝt & derely serued.
        
Meanwhile the lord pursues the wild boar,
1560

          Þe lede with þe ladyeȝ layked alle day,
        

          Bot þe lorde ouer þe londeȝ launced ful ofte,
        

          Sweȝ his vncely swyn, þat swyngeȝ bi þe bonkkeȝ,
        
that bit the backs of his hounds asunder,

          & bote þe best of his bracheȝ þe bakkeȝ in sunder;
        
1564

          Þer he bode in his bay, tel1 bawe-men hit breken,
        

          & made2 hym, maw-gref his bed, forto mwe vtter;
        
and caused the stiffest of the hunters to start.

          So felle floneȝ per flete, when þe folk gedered;
        

          Bot ȝet þe styffest to start bi stoundeȝ he made,
        
1568

          Til at þe last he watȝ so mat, he myȝt no more renne,
        
The boar runs into a hole in a rock by the side
        of a brook.

          Bot in þe hast þat he myȝt, he to a hole wynneȝ,
        

          Of a rasse, bi a rokk, þer renneȝ þe boerne,
        

          He gete þe bonk at his bak, bigyneȝ to scrape,
        
The froth foams at his mouth. 1572

          Þe froþe femed3 at his mouth vnfayre bi þe wykeȝ,
        

          Whetteȝ his whyte tuscheȝ; with hym þen
          irked
        

          Alle þe burneȝ so bolde, þat hym by stoden,
        
None durst approach him,

          To nye hym on-ferum, bot neȝe hym non durst
        
1576

          for woþe;
        

          He hade hurt so mony byforne,
        

          Þat al þuȝt4 þenne ful loþe,
        
so many had he torn with his tusks.

          Be more wyth his tuscheȝ torne,
        
1580

          Þat breme watȝ [&] brayn-wod bothe.
        


1 til (?). 2 madee, in MS. 3 fomed (?).
        4 þoȝt (?).
      


      XVIII.
    


The knight, seeing the boar at bay,

          Til þe knyȝt com hym-self, kachande his blonk,
        

          Syȝ hym byde at þe bay, his burneȝ bysyde,
        
alights from his horse,

          He lyȝtes luflych1 adoun, leueȝ his
          corsour,
        
1584

          Braydeȝ out a bryȝt bront, & bigly forth strydeȝ,
        

          Foundeȝ fast þurȝ þe forth, þer þe felle bydeȝ,
        
and seeks to attack him with his sword.

          Þe wylde watȝ war of þe wyȝe with weppen in
          honde,
        

          Hef hyȝly þe here, so hetterly he fnast,
        
1588

          Þat fele ferde for þe frekeȝ,2 lest felle hym
          þe worre;
        
The "swine sets out" upon the man,

          Þe swyn setteȝ hym out on þe segge euen,
        

          Þat þe burne & þe bor were boþe vpon hepeȝ,
        

          In þe wyȝt-est of þe water, þe worre hade þat oþer;
        
who, aiming well, 1592

          For þe mon merkkeȝ hym wel, as þay mette fyrst,
        

          Set sadly þe scharp in þe slot euen,
        
wounds him in the pit of the stomach.

          Hit hym vp to þe hult, þat þe hert schyndered,
        

          & he ȝarrande hym ȝelde, & ȝedoun3
          þe water,
        
1596

          ful tyt;
        
[Fol. 112b.]

          A hundreth houndeȝ hym hent,
        
The boar is soon bitten to death by a hundred
        hounds.

          Þat bremely con hym bite,
        

          Burneȝ him broȝt to bent,
        
1600

          & doggeȝ to dethe endite.
        


1 MS. luslych. 2 freke (?). 3 ȝede
        doun (?).
      


      XIX.
    


Then was there blowing of horns

          There watȝ blawyng of prys in mony breme home,
        

          Heȝe halowing on hiȝe, with haþeleȝ
          þat myȝt;
        
and baying of hounds.

          Brachetes bayed þat best, as bidden þe maystereȝ,
        
1604

          Of þat chargeaunt chace þat were chef huntes.
        
One wise in woodcraft begins to unlace the boar.

          Þenne a wyȝe þat watȝ wys vpon wod crafteȝ,
        

          To vnlace þis bor lufly bigynneȝ;
        
First he hews off the head, then rends him by the
        back.

          Fyrst he hewes of his hed, & on hiȝe setteȝ,
        
1608

          & syþen rendeȝ him al roghe bi þe rygge after,
        
He next removes the bowels, broils them on the
        ashes, and therewith rewards his hounds.

          Braydeȝ out þe boweles, brenneȝ hom on glede,
        

          With bred blent þer-with his braches rewardeȝ;
        

          Syþen he britneȝ out þe brawen in bryȝt brode
          [s]cheldeȝ,
        
Then the hastlets are removed. 1612

          & hatȝ out þe hastletteȝ, as hiȝtly bisemeȝ;
        
The two halves are next bound together and hung
        upon a pole.

          & ȝet hem halcheȝ al hole þe halueȝ to-geder,
        

          & syþen on a stif stange stoutly hem henges.
        

          Now with þis ilk swyn þay swengen to home;
        
The boar's head is borne before the knight, who
        hastens home. 1616

          Þe bores hed watȝ borne bifore þe burnes seluen,
        

          Þat him for-ferde in þe forþe, þurȝ forse of his
          honde,
        

          so stronge;
        

          Til he seȝ sir Gawayne,
        
1620

          In halle hym þoȝt ful longe,
        
Gawayne is called to receive the spoil.

          He calde, & he com gayn,
        

          His feeȝ þer for to fonge.
        



      XX.
    


The lord of the land is well pleased when he sees
        Sir Gawayne,

          Þe lorde ful lowde with lote, & laȝed myry,
        
1624

          When he seȝe sir G: with solace he
          spekeȝ;
        

          Þe goude ladyeȝ were geten, & gedered þe meyny,
        
He shows him the shields of the wild boar, and
        tells him of its length and breadth.

          He scheweȝ hem þe scheldeȝ, & schapes hem þe tale,
        

          Of þe largesse, & þe lenþe, þe liþerneȝ alse,
        
1628

          Of þe were of þe wylde swyn, in wod þer he fled.
        

          Þat oþer knyȝt ful comly comended his dedeȝ,
        

          & praysed hit as gret prys, þat he proued hade;
        
Such a "brawn of a beast," Sir Gawayne says, he
        never has seen.

          For suche a brawne of a best, þe bolde burne sayde,
        
1632

          Ne such sydes of a swyn, segh he neuer are.
        

          Þenne hondeled þay þe hoge hed, þe hende mon hit
          praysed,
        
[Fol. 113.]

          & let lodly þerat þe lorde forte here:
        
Gawayne takes possession of it according to
        covenant,

          "Now Gawayn," quod þe god mon, "þis gomen is your awen,
        
1636

          Bi fyn for-warde & faste, faythely ȝe knowe."
        

          "Hit is sothe," quod þe segge, "& as siker trwe;
        

          Alle my get I schal yow gif agayn, bi my trawþe."
        
and in return kisses his host,

          He [hent] þe haþel aboute þe halse, & hendely hym kysses,
        
1640

          & efter-sones of þe same he serued hym þere.
        

          "Now ar we euen," quod þe haþel, "in þis euen-tide,
        

          Of alle þe couenauntes þat we knyt, syþen I com hider,
        

          bi lawe;"
        
who declares his guest to be the best he knows.
1644

          Þe lorde sayde, "bi saynt Gile,
        

          ȝe ar þe best þat I knowe,
        

          Ȝe ben ryche in a whyle,
        

          Such chaffer & ȝe drowe."
        



      XXI.
    


Tables are raised aloft, 1648

          Þenne þay teldet tableȝ [on] trestes alofte,
        
cloths cast upon them,

          Kesten cloþeȝ vpon, clere lyȝt þenne
        
and torches are lighted.

          Wakned bi woȝeȝ, waxen torches
        

          Seggeȝ sette, & serued in sale al aboute;
        
With much mirth and glee, 1652

          Much glam & gle glent vp þer-inne,
        

          Aboute þe fyre vpon flet, & on fele wyse,
        
supper is served in the hall,

          At þe soper & after, mony aþel songeȝ,
        

          As coundutes of kryst-masse, & caroleȝ newe,
        
1656

          With alle þe manerly merþe þat mon may of telle.
        
and ever our lovely knight by the lady sits,

          & euer oure luflych knyȝt þe lady bi-syde;
        

          Such semblaunt to þat segge semly ho made,
        
who does all she can to please her companion.

          Wyth stille stollen countenaunce, þat stalworth to
          plese,
        
1660

          Þat al for-wondered watȝ þe wyȝe, & wroth with
          hym-seluen,
        

          Bot he nolde not for his nurture nurne hir a-ȝayneȝ,
        

          Bot dalt with hir al in daynte, how-se-euer
          þe dede turned
        

          to wrast;
        
When they had long played in the hall,
1664

          Quen þay hade played in halle,
        

          As longe as hor wylle hom last,
        
they proceeded "to chamber."

          To chambre he1 con hym calle,
        

          & to þe chem-ne þay past.
        


1 ho (?).
      


      XXII.
    


There they drank and discoursed. 1668

          Ande þer þay dronken, & dalten, & demed eft nwe,
        

          To norne on þe same note, on nweȝereȝ euen;
        
Gawayne begs leave to depart on the morrow.

          Bot þe knyȝt craued leue, to kayre on þe morn,
        

          For hit watȝ neȝ at þe terme, þat he to1 schulde.
        
[Fol. 113b.] 1672

          Þe lorde hym letted of þat, to lenge hym resteyed,
        
His host swears to him,

          & sayde, "as I am trwe segge, I siker my trawþe,
        
that he shall come to the Green Chapel on New
        Year's morn long before prime.

          Þou schal cheue to þe grene chapel, þy charres to make,
        

          Leude, on nwȝereȝ lyȝt, longe bifore pryme:
        
1676

          For-þy þow lye in þy loft, & lach þyn ese,
        

          & I schal hunt in þis holt, & halde þe towcheȝ,
        

          Chaunge wyth þe cheuisaunce, bi þat I charre hider;
        

          For I haf fraysted þe twys, & faythful I fynde þe,
        
1680

          Now þrid tyme þrowe best þenk on þe morne,
        

          Make we mery quyl we may, & mynne vpon Ioye,
        

          For þe lur may mon lach, when so mon lykeȝ."
        

          Þis watȝ grayþely graunted, & Gawayn is lenged,
        
Our knight consents to remain for another night.
1684

          Bliþe broȝt watȝ hym drynk, & þay to bedde ȝeden,
        

          with liȝt;
        
Full still and softly he sleeps all night.

          Sir G: lis & slepes,
        

          Ful stille & softe al niȝt;
        
Early in the morning the lord is up. 1688

          Þe lorde þat his crafteȝ kepes,
        

          Ful erly he watȝ diȝt.
        


1 te (?).
      


      XXIII.
    


After mass, a morsel he take with his men.

          After messe a morsel1 he & his men token,
        

          Miry watȝ þe mornyng, his mounture he askes;
        
Then were all on their horses before the
        hall-gates. 1692

          Alle þe haþeles þat on horse schulde helden hym after,
        

          Were boun busked on hor blonkkeȝ, bi-fore2 þe
          halle ȝateȝ;
        
It was a clear frosty morning.

          Ferly fayre watȝ þe folde, for þe forst clenged,
        

          In rede rudede vpon rak rises þe sunne,
        
The hunters, dispersed by a wood's side,
1696

          & ful clere costeȝ3 þe clowdes of þe welkyn.
        

          Hunteres vnhardeled bi a holt syde,
        

          Rocheres roungen bi rys, for rurde of her hornes;
        
come upon the track of a fox,

          Summe fel in þe fute, þer þe fox bade,
        
1700

          Trayleȝ ofte a trayteres4, bi traunt of
          her wyles;
        

          A kenet kryes þerof, þe hunt on hym calles,
        

          His felaȝes fallen hym to, þat fnasted ful þike,
        
which is followed up by the hounds.

          Runnen forth in a rabel, in his ryȝt fare;
        
1704

          & he fyskeȝ hem by-fore, þay founden hym sone,
        
They soon get sight of the game,

          & quen þay seghe hym with syȝt, þay sued
          hym fast,
        

          Wreȝande h[ym] ful [w]eterly with a wroth noyse;
        
and pursue him through many a rough grove.

          & he trantes & tornayeeȝ þurȝ mony tene greue;
        
1708

          Hamlouneȝ, & herkeneȝ, bi heggeȝ ful ofte;
        
[Fol. 114.]The fox at last leaps over a
        spinny,

          At þe last bi a littel dich he lepeȝ ouer a spenné,
        

          Steleȝ out ful stilly bi a strothe rande,
        
and by a rugged path seeks to get clear from the
        hounds.

          Went haf wylt of þe wode, with wyleȝ fro þe houndes,
        
1712

          Þenne watȝ he went, er he wyst, to5 a wale
          tryster,
        
He comes upon one of the hunting stations, where
        he is attacked by the dogs.

          Þer þre þro at a þrich þrat hym at ones,
        

          al graye;
        
However, he slips them,

          He blenched aȝayn bilyue,
        
1716

          & stifly start onstray,
        

          With alle þe wo on lyue,
        
and makes again for the wood.

          To þe wod he went away.
        


1 MS. nnorsel. 2 bi-forere, in MS. 3
        casteȝ (?). 4 trayveres (?). 5 to to, in MS.
      


      XXIV.
    


Then was it fine sport to listen to the hounds,

          Thenne watȝ hit lif vpon list to lyþen þe houndeȝ,
        
1720

          When alle þe mute hade hym met, menged to-geder,
        

          Suche a sorȝe at þat syȝt þay sette on his hede,
        

          As alle þe clamberande clyffes hade clatered on hepes;
        
and the hallooing of the hunters.

          Here he watȝ halawed, when haþeleȝ hym metten,
        
1724

          Loude he watȝ ȝayned, with ȝarande
          speche;
        
There the fox was threatened and called a thief.

          Þer he watȝ þreted, & ofte þef called,
        

          & ay þe titleres at his tayl, þat tary he ne myȝt;
        

          Ofte he watȝ runnen at, when he out rayked,
        
But Reynard was wily, 1728

          & ofte reled in aȝayn, so reniarde watȝ wylé.
        
and led them astray over mounts.

          & ȝe he lad hem bi lag, mon, þe lorde & his meyny;
        

          On þis maner bi þe mountes, quyle myd, ouer,
          vnder,
        
Meanwhile the knight at home soundly sleeps
        within his comely curtains.

          Whyle þe hende knyȝt at home holsumly slepeȝ,
        
1732

          With-inne þe comly cortynes, on þe colde morne.
        

          Bot þe lady for luf let not to slepe,
        

          Ne þe purpose to payre, þat pyȝt in hir hert,
        

          Bot ros hir vp radly, rayked hir þeder,
        
The lady of the castle, clothed in a rich mantle,
1736

          In a mery mantyle, mete to þe erþe,
        

          Þat watȝ furred ful fyne with felleȝ, wel
          pured,
        

          No hweȝ goud on hir hede, bot þe haȝer stones
        

          Trased aboute hir tressour, be twenty in clusteres;
        
her throat and bosom all bare, 1740

          Hir þryuen face & hir þrote þrowen al naked,
        

          Hir brest bare bifore, & bihinde eke.
        
comes to Gawayne's chamber,

          Ho comeȝ with-inne þe chambre dore, &
          closes hit hir after,
        
opens a window, and says,

          Wayneȝ1 vp a wyndow, & on þe wyȝe calleȝ,
        
1744

          & radly þus re-hayted hym, with hir
          riche wordeȝ,
        

          with2 chere;
        
"Ah! man, how canst thou sleep,

          "A! mon, how may þou slepe,
        
[Fol. 114b.]this morning is so
        clear?"

          Þis morning is so clere?"
        
1748

          He watȝ in drowping depe,
        

          Bot þenne he con hir here.
        


1 wayueȝ(?). 2 bi, à sec. manu.
      


      XXV.
    


The knight was then dreaming of his forthcoming
        adventure at the Green Chapel.

          In dreȝ droupyng of dreme draueled þat noble,
        

          As mon þat watȝ in mornyng of mony þro þoȝtes,
        
1752

          How þat destiné schulde þat day [dyȝt] his wyrde,
        

          At þe grene chapel, when he þe gome metes,
        

          & bi-houes his buffet abide, with-oute debate more;
        
He awakes and speaks to his fair visitor,

          Bot quen þat comly he keuered his wyttes,
        
1756

          Swenges out of þe sweuenes, & swareȝ with hast.
        

          Þe lady luflych com laȝande swete,
        
who sweetly kisses him.

          Felle ouer his fayre face, & fetly him kyssed;
        

          He welcumeȝ hir worþily, with a wale chere;
        
1760

          He seȝ hir so glorious, & gayly atyred,
        

          So fautles of hir fetures, & of so fyne hewes,
        
Great joy warms the heart of Sir Gawayne,

          Wiȝt wallande Ioye warmed his hert;
        

          With smoþe smylyng & smolt þay smeten in-to
          merþe,
        
1764

          Þat al watȝ blis & bonchef, þat breke hem bi-twene,
        

          & wynne,
        

          Þay lanced wordes gode,
        

          Much wele þen watȝ þer-inne,
        
and "great peril between them stood."
1768

          Gret perile bi-twene hem stod,
        

          Nif mare of hir knyȝt mynne.
        



      XXVI.
    


The knight is sorely pressed.

          For þat prynce of pris de-presed hym so þikke.
        

          Nurned hym so neȝe þe þred, þat nede hym bi-houed,
        
1772

          Oþer lach þer hir luf, oþer lodly re-fuse;
        

          He cared for his cortaysye, lest craþayn he were,
        
He fears lest he should become a traitor to his
        host.

          & more for his meschef, ȝif he schulde make synne,
        

          & be traytor to þat tolke, þat þat telde aȝt.
        
1776

          "God schylde," quod þe schalk, "þat schal not be-falle!"
        

          With luf-laȝyng a lyt, he layd hym
          by-syde
        

          Alle þe specheȝ of specialté þat sprange of her mouthe.
        

          Quod þat burde to þe burne, "blame ȝe disserue,
        
1780

          Ȝif ȝe luf not þat lyf þat ȝe lye nexte,
        

          Bifore alle þe wyȝeȝ in þe worlde, wounded in
          hert,
        
The lady inquire whether he has a mistress that
        he loves better than her.

          Bot if ȝe haf a lemman, a leuer, þat yow lykeȝ
          better,
        

          & folden fayth to þat fre, festned so harde,
        
[Fol. 115.] 1784

          Þat yow lausen ne lyst, & þat I leue nouþe;
        

          And þat ȝe telle me þat, now trwly I pray yow,
        

          For alle þe lufeȝ vpon lyue, layne not þe soþe,
        

          for gile."
        
Sir Gawayne swears by St. John that he neither
        has nor desires one. 1788

          Þe knyȝt sayde, "be sayn Ion,"
        

          & smeþely con he smyle,
        

          "In fayth I welde riȝt non,
        

          Ne non wil welde þe quile."
        



      XXVII.
    


1792

          "Þat is a worde," quod þat wyȝt, "þat worst is of alle,
        

          Bot I am swared for soþe, þat sore me þinkkeȝ;
        
She then kisses him, sighing for sorrow.

          Kysse me now coraly, & I schal cach heþen,
        

          I may bot mourne vpon molde, as may þat much louyes."
        
1796

          Sykande ho sweȝe doun, & semly hym kyssed,
        

          & siþen ho seueres hym fro, & says as ho
          stondes,
        

          "Now, dere, at þis de-partyng, do me þis ese,
        
She desires some gift,

          Gif me sumquat of þy gifte, þi gloue if1 hit were,
        
by which to remember him. 1800

          Þat I may mynne on þe mon, my mournyng to
          lassen."
        

          "Now Iwysse," quod þat wyȝe, "I wolde I hade here
        

          Þe leuest þing for þy luf, þat I in londe welde,
        
Gawayne tells her that she is worthy of a better
        gift than he can bestow.

          For ȝe haf deserued, forsoþe, sellyly ofte
        
1804

          More rewarde bi resoun, þen I reche myȝt,
        

          Bot to dele yow for drurye, þat dawed bot neked;
        

          Hit is not your honour to haf at þis tyme
        

          A gloue for a garysoun, of Gawayneȝ gifteȝ,
        
1808

          & I am here [on] an erande in erdeȝ vncouþe,
        
He has no men with mails containing precious
        things.

          & haue no men wyth no maleȝ, with
          menskful þingeȝ;
        

          Þat mislykeȝ me, ladé, for luf at þis tyme,2


          Iche tolke mon do as he is tan, tas to non ille,
        
1812

          ne pine."
        
Then says that lovesome,

          "Nay, hende of hyȝe honours,"
        

          Quod þat lufsum vnder lyne,
        
"Though I had nought of yours, yet should ye have
        of mine."

          "Þaȝ I hade oȝt3 of youreȝ,
        
1816

          Ȝet schulde ȝe haue of myne."
        


1 of, in MS. 2 tyne, in MS. 3 noȝt
        (?).
      


      XXVIII.
    


She offers him a gold ring,

          Ho raȝt hym a riche rynk1 of red golde werkeȝ,
        

          Wyth a starande ston, stondande alofte,
        

          Þat bere blusschande bemeȝ as þe bryȝt sunne;
        
1820

          Wyt ȝe wel, hit watȝ worth wele ful hoge.
        
but he refuses to accept it,

          Bot þe renk hit renayed, & redyly he sayde,
        
[Fol. 115b.]

          "I wil no gifteȝ for gode, my gay, at þis tyme;
        
as he has none to give in return.

          I haf none yow to norne, ne noȝt wyl I take."
        
1824

          Ho bede hit hym ful bysily, & he hir bode wernes,
        

          & swere swyftel[y] his sothe, þat he hit sese nolde;
        
Very sorrowful was that fair one on account of
        his refusal.

          & ho sore þat he forsoke, & sayde þer-after,
        

          "If ȝe renay my rynk, to ryche for hit semeȝ,
        
1828

          Ȝe wolde not so hyȝly halden be to me,
        

          I schal gif yow my girdel, þat gaynes yow lasse."
        

          Ho laȝt a lace lyȝtly, þat2 leke vmbe hir sydeȝ,
        
She takes off her "girdle,"

          Knit vpon hir kyrtel, vnder þe clere mantyle,
        
1832

          Gered hit watȝ with grene sylke, & with
          golde schaped,
        

          Noȝt bot arounde brayden, beten with fyngreȝ;
        

          & þat ho bede to þe burne, & blyþely bi-soȝt
        
and beseeches him to take it.

          Þaȝ hit vn-worþi were, þat he hit take wolde.
        
1836

          & he nay þat he nolde neghe in no wyse,
        
Gawayne again refuses to accept anything,

          Nauþer golde ne garysoun, er God hym grace sende,
        

          To acheue to þe chaunce þat he hade chosen þere.
        

          "& þerfore, I pray yow, displese yow noȝt,
        
1840

          & letteȝ be your bisinesse, for I bayþe hit yow neuer


          to graunte;
        

          I am derely to yow biholde,
        

          Bi-cause of your sembelaunt,
        
but promises, "ever in hot and in cold, to be her
        true servant." 1844

          & euer in hot & colde
        

          To be your trwe seruaunt.
        


1 ryng (?). 2 þat þat, in MS.
      


      XXIX.
    


"Do you refuse it," says the lady, because it is
        simple?

          "Now forsake ȝe þis silke." sayde þe burde þenne,
        

          "For hit is symple in hit-self. & so hit wel semeȝ?
        
1848

          Lo! so hit is littel, & lasse hit is worþy;
        
Whoso knew the virtues that it possesses, would
        highly prize it.

          Bot who-so knew þe costes þat knit ar þer-inne,
        

          He wolde hit prayse at more prys, parauenture;
        
For he who is girded with this green lace,

          For quat gome so is gorde with þis grene lace,
        
1852

          While he hit hade hemely halched aboute,
        

          Þer is no haþel vnder heuen to-hewe hym þat myȝt;
        
cannot be wounded or slain."

          For he myȝt not he slayn, for slyȝt vpon erþe."
        

          Þen kest þe knyȝt, & hit come to his hert,
        
The knight thinks of his adventure at the Green
        Chapel. 1856

          Hit were a Iuel for þe Iopardé, þat hym iugged were,
        

          When he acheued to þe chapel, his chek forto fech;
        
The lady presses him to accept the lace.

          Myȝ1 he haf slypped to þe vn-slayn, þe sleȝt were
          noble.
        
[Fol. 116.]

          Þenne ho þulged with hir þrepe, & þoled hir to speke,
        
1860

          & ho bere on hym þe belt, & bede hit hym swyþe,
        
He consents not only to take the girdle, but to
        keep the possession of it a secret.

          & he granted, & [ho] hym gafe with a goud wylle,
        

          & bisoȝt hym, for hir sake, disceuer hit neuer,
        

          Bot to lelly layne for2 hir lorde; þe leude hym
          acordeȝ.
        
1864

          Þat neuer wyȝe schulde hit wyt, Iwysse, bot þay twayne,
        

          for noȝte;
        

          He þonkked hir oft ful swyþe,
        

          Ful þro with hert & þoȝt.
        
By that time the lady has kissed him thrice.
1868

          Bi þat on þrynne syþe,
        

          He hatȝ kyst þe knyȝt so toȝt.
        


1 myȝt (?). 2 fro (?).
      


      XXX.
    


Then she takes her leave.

          Thenne lachcheȝ ho hir leue, & leueȝ hym
          þere,
        

          For more myrþe of þat mon moȝt ho not gete;
        
Gawayne then dresses himself, 1872

          When ho1 watȝ gon, sir G. gereȝ hym
          sone,
        

          Rises, & riches hym in araye noble,
        
and conceals the love-lace about his person.

          Lays vp þe luf-lace, þe lady hym raȝt,
        

          Hid hit ful holdely, þer he hit eft fonde;
        
1876

          Syþen cheuely to þe chapel choses he þe waye,
        
He then hies to mass,

          Preuely aproched to a prest, & prayed hym þere
        

          Þat he wolde lyfte2 his lyf, & lern hym better,
        

          How his sawle schulde be saued, when he schuld seye heþen.
        
and shrives him of his misdeeds. 1880

          Þere he schrof hym schyrly, & schewed his mysdedeȝ,
        

          Of þe more & þe mynne, & merci besecheȝ,
        
and prays for absolution.

          & of absolucioun he on þe segge calles;
        

          & he asoyled hym surely, & sette hym so clene,
        
He returns to the hall, and makes himself so
        merry among the ladies, 1884

          As domeȝ-day schulde haf ben diȝt on þe morn.
        

          & syþen he mace hym as mery among þe fre ladyes,
        
with comely carols,

          With comlych caroles, & alle kynnes ioye,
        

          As neuer he did bot þat daye, to þe derk nyȝt,
        
1888

          with blys;
        

          Vche mon hade daynte þare,
        
that they said,

          Of hym, & sayde Iwysse,
        
"Thus merry was he never before since hither he
        came."

          Þus myry he watȝ neuer are,
        
1892

          Syn he com hider, er þis.
        


1 he, in MS. 2 lyste (?).
      


      XXXI.
    


Gawayne's host is still in the field.

          Now hym lenge in þat lee, þer luf hym
          bi-tyde;
        

          Ȝet is þe lorde on þe launde, ledande his gomnes,
        
He has destroyed the fox.

          He hatȝ forfaren þis fox, þat he folȝed longe;
        
1896

          As he sprent ouer a spenné, to spye þe schrewe,
        
[Fol. 116b.]

          Þer as he herd þe howndes, þat hasted hym swyþe,
        
He spied Reynard coming through a "rough grove,"

          Renaud com richchande þurȝ a roȝe greue,
        

          & alle þe rabel in a res, ryȝt at his heleȝ.
        
and tried to hit him with his sword. 1900

          Þe wyȝe watȝ war of þe wylde, & warly abides,
        

          & braydeȝ out þe bryȝt bronde, & at þe best casteȝ;
        

          & he schunt for þe scharp, & schulde haf arered,
        
The fox "shunts," and is seized by one of the
        dogs.

          A rach rapes hym to, ryȝt er he myȝt,
        
1904

          & ryȝt bifore þe hors fete þay fel on hym alle,
        

          & woried me þis wyly wyth a wroth noyse.
        
The lord takes him out of the hound's mouth.

          Þe lorde lyȝteȝ bilyue, & cacheȝ by1
          sone,
        

          Rased hym ful radly out of þe rach mouþes,
        
1908

          Haldeȝ heȝe ouer his hede, haloweȝ faste,
        

          & þer bayen hym mony bray2 houndeȝ;
        
Hunters hasten thither with horns full many.

          Huntes hyȝed hem þeder, with horneȝ ful
          mony,
        

          Ay re-chatande aryȝt til þay þe renk seȝen;
        
1912

          Bi þat watȝ comen his compeyny noble,
        

          Alle þat euer ber bugle blowed at ones,
        
It was the merriest meet that ever was heard.

          & alle þise oþer halowed, þat hade no hornes,
        

          Hit watȝ þe myriest mute þat euer men herde,
        
1916

          Þe rich rurd þat þer watȝ raysed for renaude saule,
        

          with lote;
        
The hounds are rewarded,

          Hor houndeȝ þay þer rewarde,
        

          Her3 hedeȝ þay fawne & frote,
        
and then they take Reynard and "turn off his
        coat." 1920

          & syþen þay tan reynarde,
        

          & tyrnen of his cote.
        


1 hym (?). 2 braþ (?). 3 Her
        her, in MS.
      


      XXXII.
    


The hunters then hasten home.

          & þenne þay helden to home, for hit watȝ nieȝ nyȝt,
        

          Strakande ful stoutly in hor store horneȝ;
        
The lord at last alights at his dear home,
1924

          Þe lorde is lyȝt at þe laste at hys lef home,
        

          Fyndeȝ fire vpon flet, þe freke þer by-side,
        

          Sir Gawayn þe gode, þat glad watȝ with alle,
        
where he finds Gawayne amusing the ladies.

          Among þe ladies for luf he ladde much ioye,
        
1928

          He were a bleaunt of blwe, þat bradde to þe erþe,
        

          His surkot semed hym wel, þat softe watȝ forred,
        

          & his hode of þat ilke henged on his schulder,
        
The knight comes forward and welcomes his host,

          Blande al of blaunner were boþe al aboute.
        
1932

          He meteȝ me þis god mon in myddeȝ þe flore,
        

          & al with gomen he hym gret, & goudly he sayde,
        

          "I schal fylle vpon fyrst oure forwardeȝ nouþe,
        
[Fol. 117.]

          Þat we spedly han spoken, þer spared watȝ no drynk;"
        
and according to covenant kisses him thrice.
1936

          Þen acoles he [þe] knyȝt, & kysses hym þryes,
        
(See l. 1868.)

          As sauerly & sadly as he hem sette couþe.
        
"By Christ," says the other, "ye have had much
        bliss!"

          "Bi Kryst," quod þat oþer knyȝt, "ȝe cach much
          sele,
        

          In cheuisaunce of þis chaffer, ȝif ȝe hade
          goud chepeȝ."
        
1940

          "Ȝe of þe chepe no charg," quod chefly þat oþer,
        

          "As is pertly payed þe chepeȝ þat I aȝte."
        

          "Mary," quod þat oþer mon, "myn is bi-hynde,
        
I have hunted all day and have gotten nothing,

          For I haf hunted al þis day, & noȝt haf I geten,
        
but the skin of this foul fox, 1944

          Bot þis foule fox felle, þe fende haf þe godeȝ,
        
a poor reward for three such kisses."

          & þat is ful pore, for to pay for suche prys þinges,
        

          As ȝe haf þryȝt me here, þro suche þre cosses,
        

          so gode."
        
1948

          "I-noȝ," quod sir Gawayn,
        

          "I þonk yow, bi þe rode;"
        
He then tells him how the fox was slain.

          & how þe fox watȝ slayn,
        

          He tolde hym, as þay stode.
        



      XXXIII.
    


With much mirth and minstrelsy they made merry,
1952

          With merþe & mynstralsye, wyth meteȝ at hor wylle,
        

          Þay maden as mery as any men moȝten,
        

          With laȝyng of ladies, with
          loteȝ of bordes;
        

          Gawayn & þe gode mon so glad were þay boþe,
        
1956

          Bot if þe douthe had doted, oþer dronken ben oþer,
        

          Boþe þe mon & þe meyny maden mony iapeȝ,
        
until the time came for them to part.

          Til þe sesoun watȝ seȝen, þat þay seuer moste;
        

          Burneȝ to hor bedde be-houed at þe laste.
        
Gawayne takes leave of his host. 1960

          Þenne loȝly his leue at þe lorde fyrst
        

          Fochcheȝ þis fre mon, & fayre he hym þonkkeȝ;
        
and thanks him for his happy "sojourn."

          "Of such a sellyly1 soiorne, as I haf hade here,
        

          Your honour, at þis hyȝe fest, þe hyȝe kyng
          yow ȝelde!
        
1964

          I ȝef yow me for on of youreȝ, if yowre-self lykeȝ,
        

          For I mot nedes, as ȝe wot, meue to morne;
        
He asks for a man to teach him the way to the
        Green Chapel.

          & ȝe me take sum tolke, to teche, as ȝe hyȝt,
        

          Þe gate to þe grene chapel, as god wyl me suffer
        
1968

          To dele, on nwȝereȝ day, þe dome of my wyrdes."
        

          "In god fayþe," quod þe god mon. "wyth a goud wylle;
        

          Al þat euer I yow hyȝt, halde schal I rede."
        
A servant is assigned to him,

          Þer asyngnes he a seruaunt, to sett hym in
          þe waye,
        
[Fol. 117b.] 1972

          & coundue hym by þe downeȝ, þat he no drechch
          had,
        

          For to f[e]rk þurȝ þe fryth, & fare at þe gaynest,
        

          bi greue.
        

          Þe lorde Gawayn con þonk,
        
1976

          Such worchip he wolde hym weue;
        
and then he takes leave of the ladies,

          Þen at þo ladyeȝ wlonk.
        

          Þe knyȝt hatȝ tan his leue.
        


1 selly (?).
      


      XXXIV.
    


kissing them sorrowfully.

          With care & wyth kyssyng he carppeȝ hem tille,
        
1980

          & fele þryuande þonkkeȝ he þrat hom to haue,
        

          & þay ȝelden hym aȝay[n] ȝeply þat ilk;
        
They commend him to Christ.

          Þay bikende hym to Kryst, with ful colde sykyngeȝ.
        
He then departs, thanking each one he meets "for
        his service and solace."

          Syþen fro þe meyny he menskly de-partes;
        
1984

          Vche mon þat he mette, he made hem a þonke,
        

          For his seruyse, & his solace, & his sere pyne,
        

          Þat þay wyth busynes had ben, aboute hym to serue;
        

          & vche segge as sore, to seuer with hym
          þere,
        
1988

          As þay hade wonde worþyly with þat wlonk euer.
        
He retires to rest but sleeps but little,

          Þen with ledes & lyȝt he watȝ ladde
          to his chambre,
        

          & blybely broȝt to his bedde, to be at his rest;
        

          ȝif he ne slepe soundyly, say ne dar I,
        
for much has he to think of on the morrow.
1992

          For he hade muche on þe morn to mynne, ȝif he wolde,
        

          in þoȝt;
        
Let him there lie still.

          Let hym lyȝe þere stille,
        

          He hatȝ1 nere þat he soȝt,
        
Be still awhile, and I shall tell how they
        wrought. 1996

          & ȝe wyl a whyle be stylle,
        

          I schal telle yow how þay wroȝt.
        


1 watȝ (?).
      


      [FYTTE THE FOURTH.]
    

      I.
    


New Year's Day approaches.

          Now neȝeȝ þe nwȝere, & þe nyȝt passeȝ,
        

          Þe day dryueȝ to þe derk, as dryȝtyn biddeȝ;
        
The weather is stormy. 2000

          Bot wylde wedereȝ of þe worlde wakned þeroute,
        

          Clowdes kesten kenly þe colde to þe erþe,
        

          Wyth nyȝe1 in-noghe of þe norþe, þe naked to
          tene;
        
Snow falls.

          Þe snawe snitered ful snart, þat snayped þe wylde;
        
2004

          Þe werbelande wynde wapped fro þe hyȝe,
        
The dales are full of drift.

          & drof vche dale ful of dryftes ful grete.
        

          Þe leude lystened ful wel, þat leȝ in his bedde,
        
Gawayne in his bed hears each cock that crows.

          Þaȝ he lowkeȝ his liddeȝ, ful lyttel he slepes;
        
2008

          Bi vch kok þat crue, he knwe wel þe steuen.
        
[Fol. 118.]

          De-liuerly he dressed vp, er þe day sprenged,
        

          For þere watȝ lyȝt of a lau[m]pe, þat lemed in his
          chambre;
        
He calls for his chamberlain, and bids him bring
        him his armour.

          He called to his chamberlayn, þat cofly hym swared,
        
2012

          & bede hym bryng hym his bruny, & his
          blonk sadel;
        

          Þat oþer ferkeȝ hym vp, & fecheȝ hym
          his wedeȝ,
        

          & grayþeȝ me sir Gawayn vpon a grett wyse.
        

          Fyrst he clad hym in his cloþeȝ, þe colde for to
          were;
        
2016

          & syþen his oþer harnays, þat holdely watȝ keped,
        

          Boþe his paunce, & his plateȝ, piked ful clene,
        
Men knock off the rust from his rich habergeon.

          Þe ryngeȝ2 rokked of þe roust, of his riche
          bruny;
        

          & al watȝ fresch as vpon fyrst, & he watȝ fayn þenne
        
2020

          to þonk;
        

          He hade vpon vche pece,
        

          Wypped ful wel & wlonk;
        
The knight then calls for his steed.

          Þe gayest in to Grece,
        
2024

          Þe burne bede bryng his blonk.
        


1 nywe (?). 2 rynkeȝ (?).
      


      II.
    


While he clothed himself in his rich weeds,

          Whyle þe wlonkest wedes he warp on hym-seluen;
        

          His cote, wyth be conysaunce of þe clere werkeȝ,
        

          Ennurned vpon veluet vertuuus1 stoneȝ,
        
2028

          Aboute beten, & bounden, enbrauded semeȝ,
        

          & fayre furred with-inne wyth fayre pelures.
        
he forgot not the "lace," the lady's gift,

          Ȝet laft he not þe lace, þe ladieȝ gifte,
        

          Þat for-gat not Gawayn, for gode of hym-seluen;
        
2032

          Bi he hade belted þe bronde vpon his balȝe hauncheȝ,
        
but with it doubly girded his loins.

          Þenn dressed he his drurye double hym aboute;
        

          Swyþe sweþled vmbe his swange swetely, þat knyȝt,
        

          Þe gordel of þe grene silke, þat gay wel bisemed,
        
2036

          Vpon þat ryol red cloþe, þat ryche watȝ to schewe.
        
He wore it not for its rich ornaments,

          Bot wered not þis ilk wyȝe for wele þis gordel,
        

          For pryde of þe pendaunteȝ, þaȝ polyst þay were,
        

          & þaȝ þe glyterande golde glent vpon endeȝ,
        
"but to save himself when it behoved him to
        suffer." 2040

          Bot forto sauen hym-self, when suffer hym
          by-houed,
        

          To byde bale with-oute dabate, of bronde hym to
          were,
        

          oþer knyffe;
        

          Bi þat þe bolde mon boun,
        
2044

          Wynneȝ þeroute bilyue,
        
All the renowned assembly he thanks full oft.

          Alle þe meyny of renoun,
        

          He þonkkeȝ ofte ful ryue.
        


1 vertuous (?).
      


      III.
    


[Fol. 118b.]Then was Gringolet
        arrayed,

          Thenne watȝ Gryngolet grayþe, þat gret watȝ &
          huge,
        
2048

          & hade ben soiourned sauerly, & in a
          siker wyse,
        
full ready to prick on.

          Hym lyst prik for poynt, þat proude hors þenne;
        

          Þe wyȝe wynneȝ hym to, & wyteȝ on his
          lyre,
        

          & sayde soberly hym-self, & by his soth swereȝ,
        
2052

          "Here is a meyny in þis mote, þat on menske þenkkeȝ,
        
Gawayne returns thanks for the honour and
        kindness shown to him by all.

          Þe mon hem maynteines, ioy mot þay haue;
        

          Þe leue lady, on lyue luf hir bityde;
        

          Ȝif þay for charyté cherysen a gest,
        
2056

          & halden honour in her honde, þe haþel hem
          ȝelde,
        

          Þat haldeȝ þe heuen vpon hyȝe, & also yow alle!
        

          & ȝif I myȝt lyf vpon londe lede any quyle,
        

          I schuld rech yow sum rewarde redyly, if I myȝt."
        
He then steps into his saddle, 2060

          Þenn steppeȝ he in-to stirop, & strydeȝ
          alofte;
        

          His schalk schewed hym his schelde, on schulder he hit laȝt,
        

          Gordeȝ to Gryngolet, with his gilt heleȝ,
        
and "starts on the stone" without more delay.

          & he starteȝ on þe ston, stod he no lenger,
        
2064

          to praunce;
        

          His haþel on hors watȝ þenne,
        

          Þat bere his spere & launce.
        
"This castle to Christ I commend; may he give it
        ever good chance!"

          "Þis kastel to Kryst I kenne,
        
2068

          He gef hit ay god chaunce!"
        



      IV.
    


The gates are soon opened.

          The brygge watȝ brayde doun, & þe brode ȝateȝ
        

          Vnbarred, & born open, vpon boþe halue;
        
The knight passes thereout,

          Þe burne blessed hym bilyue, & þe bredeȝ passed;
        
2072

          Prayses þe porter, bifore þe prynce kneled,
        

          Gef hym God & goud day, þat Gawayn he saue;
        
and goes on his way accompanied by his guide.

          & went on his way, with his wyȝe one,
        

          Þat schulde teche hym to tourne to þat tene place,
        
2076

          Þer þe ruful race he schulde re-sayue.
        

          Þay boȝen bi bonkkeȝ, þer boȝeȝ ar bare,
        
They climb by cliffs,

          Þay clomben bi clyffeȝ, þer clengeȝ þe colde;
        

          Þe heuen watȝ vp halt, bot vgly þer vnder,
        
2080

          Mist muged on þe mor, malt on þe mounteȝ,
        
where each "hill had a hat and a mist-cloak,"

          Vch hille hade a hatte, a myst-hakel huge;
        

          Brokeȝ byled, & breke, bi bonkkeȝ aboute,
        

          Schyre schaterande on schoreȝ, þer þay doun
          schowued.
        
[Fol. 119.] 2084

          Welawylle watȝ þe way, þer þay bi wod schulden,
        
until daylight.

          Til hit watȝ sone sesoun, þat þe sunne ryses,
        

          þat tyde;
        
They were then on a "hill full high."

          Þay were on a hille ful hyȝe,
        
2088

          Þe quyte snaw lay bisyde;
        
The servant bade his master abide, saying,

          Þe burne þat rod hym by
        

          Bede his mayster abide.
        



      V.
    


"I have brought you hither,

          "For I haf wonnen yow hider, wyȝe, at þis tyme,
        
2092

          & now nar ȝe not fer fro þat note place,
        
ye are not now far from the noted place.

          Þat ȝe han spied & spuryed so specially after;
        

          Bot I schal say yow for soþe, syþen I yow knowe,
        

          & ȝe ar a lede vpon lyue, þat I wel louy,
        
2096

          Wolde ȝe worch bi my wytte, ȝe worþed þe better.
        
Full perilous is it esteemed.

          Þe place þat ȝe prece to, ful perelous is halden;
        
The lord of that 'waste' is stiff and stern.

          Þer woneȝ a wyȝe in þat waste, þe worst vpon erþe;
        

          For he is stiffe, & sturne, & to strike louies,
        
2100

          & more he is þen any mon vpon myddelerde,
        
His body is bigger 'than the best four in
        Arthur's house.'

          & his body bigger þen þe best fowre.
        

          Þat ar in Arþureȝ hous, Hestor1 oþer
          oþer.
        

          He cheueȝ þat chaunce at þe chapel grene;
        
None passes by the Green Chapel, 'that he does
        not ding to death with dint of his hand.' 2104

          Þer passes non bi þat place, so proude in his armes,
        

          Þat he ne dynneȝ hym to deþe, with
          dynt of his honde;
        

          For he is a mon methles, & mercy non vses,
        
For be it churl or chaplain, monk, mass-priest,
        'or any man else,' he kills them all.

          For he hit chorle, oþer chaplayn, þat bi þe chapel rydes,
        
2108

          Monk, oþer masse-prest, oþer any mon elles,
        

          Hym þynk as queme hym to quelle, as quyk go hym
          seluen.
        

          For-þy I say þe as soþe as ȝe in sadel sitte,
        

          Com ȝe þere, ȝe be kylled, [I] may þe knyȝt rede,
        
2112

          Trawe ȝe me þat trwely, þaȝ ȝe had twenty lyues
        

          to spende;
        
He has lived there full long.

          He hatȝ wonyd here ful ȝore,
        

          On bent much baret bende,
        
Against his dints sore ye may not defend you.
2116

          Aȝayn his dynteȝ sore,
        

          Ȝe may not yow defende."
        


1 Hector (?).
      


      VI.
    


Wherefore, good Sir Gawayne, let this man alone.

          "For-þy, goude sir Gawayn, let þe gome one,
        

          & gotȝ a-way sum oþer gate; vpon Goddeȝ
          halue;
        
Go by some other region, 2120

          Cayreȝ bi sum oþer kyth, þer Kryst mot yow spede;
        

          & I schal hyȝ me hom aȝayn, & hete yow fyrre,
        
[Fol. 119b.]I swear by God and all
        His saints, that I will never say that ever ye attempted to flee from
        any man."

          Þat I schal swere bi God, & alle his gode halȝeȝ,
        

          As help me God & þe halydam, & oþeȝ in-noghe,
        
2124

          Þat I schal lelly yow layne, & lance neuer tale,
        

          Þat euer ȝe fondet to fle, for freke þat I wyst."
        

          "Grant merci;" quod Gawayn, & gruchyng
          he sayde,
        

          "Wel worth þe wyȝe, þat woldeȝ my gode,
        
2128

          & þat lelly me layne, I leue wel þou woldeȝ!
        
Gawayne replies that to shun this danger would
        mark him as a "coward knight."

          Bot helde þou hit neuer so holde, & I here passed,
        

          Founded for ferde for to fle, in fourme þat þou
          telleȝ,
        

          I were a knyȝt kowarde, I myȝt not1 be excused.
        
To the Chapel, therefore, he will go,
2132

          Bot I wy1 to þe chape1, for chaunce þat may falle,
        

          & talk wyth þat ilk tulk þe tale þat me lyste,
        

          Worþe hit wele, oþer wo, as þe wyrde lykeȝ
        

          hit hafe;
        
though the owner thereof were a stern knave.
2136

          Þaȝe he be a sturn knape,
        

          To stiȝtel, &2 stad with staue,
        
"Full well can God devise his servants for to
        save."

          Ful wel con dryȝtyn schape,
        

          His seruaunteȝ forto saue."
        


1 mot, in MS. 2 & &, in MS.
      


      VII.
    


"Mary!" quoth the other, "since it pleases thee
        to lose thy life, 2140

          "Mary!" quod þat oþer mon, "now þou so much
          spelleȝ,
        

          Þat þou wylt þyn awen nye nyme to þy-seluen,
        

          & þe lyst lese þy lyf, þe lette I ne kepe;
        
take thy helmet on thy head, and thy spear in thy
        hand, and ride down this path by yon rock-side,

          Haf here þi helme on þy hede, þi spere in þi honde,
        
2144

          & ryde me doun þis ilk rake, bi ȝon rokke syde,
        
till thou come to the bottom of the valley;

          Til þou be broȝt to þe boþem of þe brem valay;
        
look a little to the left,

          Þenne loke a littel on þe launde, on þi lyfte honde,
        
and thou shalt see the Chapel itself and the man
        that guards it."

          & þou schal se in þat slade þe self chapel,
        
2148

          & þe borelych burne on bent, þat hit kepeȝ.
        

          Now fareȝ wel on Godeȝ half, Gawayn þe noble,
        

          For alle þe golde vpon grounde I nolde go with þe,
        

          Ne bere þe felaȝschip þurȝ þis fryth on fote fyrre."
        
Having thus spoken the guide takes leave of the
        knight. 2152

          Bi þat þe wyȝe in þe wod wendeȝ his brydel,
        

          Hit þe hors with þe heleȝ, as harde as he myȝt,
        

          Lepeȝ hym ouer þe launde, & leueȝ
          þe knyȝt þere,
        

          al one.
        
"By God's self," says Sir Gawayne, "I will
        neither weep nor groan. 2156

          "Bi Goddeȝ self," quod Gawayn,
        

          "I wyl nauþer grete ne grone,
        
To God's will I am full ready."

          To Goddeȝ wylle I am ful bayn,
        

          & to hym I haf me tone."
        



      VIII.
    


[Fol. 120.]Then he pursues his journey,
2160

          Thenne gyrdeȝ he to Gryngolet, & gedereȝ þe rake,
        

          Schowueȝ in bi a schore, at a schaȝe syde,
        
rides through the dale, and looks about.

          Rideȝ þurȝ þe roȝe bonk, ryȝt to þe dale;
        

          & þenne he wayted hym aboute, & wylde hit hym
          þoȝt,
        
He sees no sign of a resting-place, but only high
        and steep banks. 2164

          & seȝe no syngne of resette, bisydeȝ nowhere,
        

          Bot hyȝe bonkkeȝ & brent, vpon boþe halue,
        

          & ruȝe knokled knarreȝ, with knorned stoneȝ;
        

          Þe skweȝ of þe scowtes skayued1 hym þoȝt.
        
2168

          Þenne he houed, & wyth-hylde his hors at þat tyde,
        

          & ofte chaunged his cher, þe chapel to seche;
        
No chapel could he discern.

          He seȝ non suche in no syde, & selly hym þoȝt,
        

          Sone a lyttel on a launde, a lawe as hit we[re];
        
At last he sees a hill by the side of a stream;
2172

          A balȝ berȝ, bi a bonke, þe brymme by-syde,
        

          Bi a forȝ of a flode, þat ferked þare;
        

          Þe borne blubred þer-inne, as hit boyled hade.
        
thither he goes,

          Þe knyȝt kacheȝ his caple, & com to þe lawe,
        
alights and fastens his horse to a branch of a
        tree. 2176

          Liȝteȝ doun luflyly, & at a lynde tacheȝ
        

          Þe rayne, & his riche, with a roȝe braunche;
        
He walks around the hill, debating with himself
        what it might be,

          Þen[n]e he boȝeȝ to þe berȝe, aboute hit he
          walke,
        

          D[e]batande with hym-self, quat hit be myȝt.
        
2180

          Hit hade a hole on þe ende, & on ayþer syde,
        

          & ouer-growen with gresse in glodes ay
          where,
        

          & al watȝ holȝ in-with, nobot an
          olde caue,
        
and at last finds an old cave in the crag.

          Or a creuisse of an olde cragge, he couþe hit noȝt deme
        
2184

          with spelle,
        

          "We,2 lorde," quod þe gentyle knyȝt,
        

          "Wheþer þis be þe grene chapelle;
        
He prays that about midnight he may tell his
        matins.

          He myȝt aboute myd-nyȝt,
        
2188

          [Þ]e dele his matynnes telle!"
        


1 skayned (?). 2 wel (?).
      


      IX.
    


"Truly," says Sir Gawayne, "a desert is here,

          "Now i-wysse," quod Wowayn, "wysty is here;
        

          Þis oritore is vgly, with erbeȝ ouer-growen;
        
a fitting place for the man in green to 'deal
        here his devotions in devil fashion.'

          Wel bisemeȝ þe wyȝe wruxled in grene
        
2192

          Dele here his deuocioun, on þe deueleȝ wyse;
        

          Now I fele hit is þe fende, in my fyue wytteȝ,
        

          Þat hatȝ stoken me þis steuen, to strye me here;
        
It is most cursed kirk that ever I entered."

          Þis is a chapel of meschaunce, þat chekke hit by-tyde,
        
2196

          Hit is þe corsedest kyrk, þat euer i com inne!"
        
[Fol. 120b.]

          With heȝe helme on his hede, his launce in his
          honde,
        
Roaming about he hears a loud noise,

          He romeȝ vp to þe rokke of þo roȝ woneȝ;
        

          Þene herde he of þat hyȝe hil, in a harde roche,
        
from beyond the brook. 2200

          Biȝonde þe broke, in a bonk, a wonder breme noyse,
        
It clattered like the grinding of a scythe on a
        grindstone.

          Quat! hit clatered in þe clyff, as hit cleue schulde,
        

          As one vpon a gryndelston hade grounden a syþe;
        
It whirred like a mill-stream.

          What! hit wharred, & whette, as water at a mulne,
        
2204

          What! hit rusched, & ronge, rawþe to here.
        

          Þenne "bi Godde," quod Gawayn, "þat gere as1
          I trowe,
        

          Is ryched at þe reuerence, me renk to mete,
        

          bi rote;
        
2208

          Let God worche we loo,
        
"Though my life I forgo," says the knight, "no
        noise shall terrify me."

          Hit helppeȝ me not a mote,
        

          My lif þaȝ I for-goo,
        

          Drede dotȝ me no lote."
        


1 at, in MS.
      


      X.
    


Then cried he aloud, 2212

          Thenne þe knyȝt con calle ful hyȝe,
        
"Who dwells here discourse with me to hold?"

          "Who stiȝtleȝ in þis sted, me steuen to holde?
        
Now is the good Gawayne going aright

          For now is gode Gawayn goande ryȝt here,
        

          If any wyȝe oȝt wyl wynne hider fast,
        
2216

          Oþer now, oþer neuer, his nedeȝ to spede."
        
He hears a voice commanding him to abide where he
        is.

          "Abyde," quod on on þe bonke, abouen ouer his hede,
        

          "& þou schal haf al in hast, þat I þe hyȝt
          ones."
        

          Ȝet he rusched on þat rurde, rapely a þrowe,
        
2220

          & wyth quettyng a-wharf, er he wolde lyȝt;
        
Soon there comes out of a hole, with a fell
        weapon,

          & syþen he keuereȝ bi a cragge, & comeȝ of a
          hole,
        

          Whyrlande out of a wro, wyth a felle weppen,
        
a Danish axe, quite new,

          A deneȝ ax nwe dyȝt, þe dynt with [t]o ȝelde
        
2224

          With a borelych bytte, bende by þe halme,
        

          Fyled in a fylor, fowre fote large,
        

          Hit watȝ no lasse, bi þat lace þat lemed ful bryȝt.
        
the "knight in green," clothed as before.

          & þe gome in þe erene gered as fyrst,
        
2228

          Boþe þe lyre & þe leggeȝ, lokkeȝ, & berde,
        

          Saue þat fayre on his fote he foundeȝ on þe erþe,
        

          Sette þe stele to þe stone, & stalked bysyde.
        
When he reaches the stream, he hops over and
        strides about.

          When he wan to þe watter, þer he wade nolde,
        
2232

          He hypped ouer on hys ax, & orpedly strydeȝ,
        

          Bremly broþe on a bent, þat brode watȝ a-boute,
        

          on snawe.
        
[Fol. 121.]He meets Sir Gawayne without
        obeisance.

          Sir Gawayn þe knyȝt con mete.
        
2236

          He ne lutte hym no þyng lowe,
        
The other tells him that he is now ready for
        conversation

          Þat oþer sayde, "now, sir swete,
        

          Of steuen mon may þe trowe."
        



      XI.
    


"God preserve thee!" says the Green Knight,

          "Gawayn," quod þat grene gome, "God þe mot loke!
        
2240

          I-wysse þou art welcom,1 wyȝe, to my place,
        
"as a true knight 'thou hast timed thy travel'

          & þou hatȝ tymed þi trauayl as true2
          mon schulde;
        
Thou knowest the covenant between us,

          & þou knoweȝ þe couenaunteȝ kest vus
          by-twene,
        

          At þis tyme twelmonyth þou toke þat þe falled,
        
that on New Year's day I should return thy blow
2244

          & I schulde at þis nwe ȝere ȝeply þe quyte.
        
Here we are alone,

          & we ar in þis valay, verayly oure one,
        

          Here ar no renkes vs to rydde, rele as vus likeȝ;
        
Have off thy helmet and take thy pay at once."

          Haf þy3 helme of þy hede, & haf here þy pay;
        
2248

          Busk no more debate þen I þe bede þenne,
        

          "When þou wypped of my hede at a wap one."
        
"By God," quoth Sir Gawayne, "I shall not
        begrudge thee thy will."

          "Nay, bi God," quod Gawayn, "þat me gost lante,
        

          I schal gruch þe no grwe, for grem þat falleȝ;
        
2252

          Botstyȝtel þe vpon on strok, & I schal stonde stylle,
        

          & warp þe no wernyng, to worch as þe lykeȝ,
        

          no whare."
        
Then he shows his bare neck,

          He lened with þe nek, & lutte,
        
2256

          & schewed þat schyre al bare,
        

          & lette as he noȝt dutte,
        
and appears undaunted.

          For drede he wolde not dare.
        


1 welcon, in MS. 2 truee in MS. 3
        MS. þy þy.
      


      XII.
    


Then the man in green seizes his grim tool.

          Then þe gome in þe grene grayþed hym swyþe,
        
2260

          Gedereȝ yp hys grymme tole, Gawayn to smyte;
        
With all his force he raises it aloft.

          With alle þe bur in his body he ber hit on lofte,
        

          Munt as maȝtyly, as marre hym he wolde;
        

          Hade hit dryuen adoun, as dreȝ as he atled,
        
2264

          Þer hade ben ded of his dynt, þat doȝty watȝ euer.
        

          Bot Gawayn on þat giserne glyfte hym bysyde,
        
As it came gliding down,

          As hit com glydande adoun, on glode hym to schende,
        
Sir Gawayne shrank a little with his shoulders.

          & schranke a lytel with þe schulderes, for þe scharp
          yrne.
        
2268

          Þat oþer schalk wyth a schunt þe schene wythhaldeȝ,
        
The other reproved him, saying,

          & þenne repreued he þe prynce with mony
          prowde wordeȝ:
        
"Thou art not Gawayne that is so good esteemed,

          "Þou art not Gawayn," quod þe gome, "þat is so
          goud halden,
        

          Þat neuer arȝed for no here, by hylle ne be vale,
        
[Fol. 121b.]for thou fleest for fear
        before thou feelest harm. 2272

          & now þou fles for ferde, er þou fele harmeȝ;
        

          Such cowardise of þat knyȝt cowþe I neuer here.
        
I never flinched when thou struckest.

          Nawþer fyked I, ne flaȝe, freke, quen þou myntest,
        

          Ne kest no kauelacion, in kyngeȝ hous
          Arthor,
        
My head flew to my foot, yet I never fled,
2276

          My hede flaȝ to my fote, & ȝet flaȝ I neuer;
        

          & þou, er any harme hent, arȝeȝ in hert,
        
wherefore I ought to be called the better man."

          Wherfore þe better burne me burde be called
        

          þer-fore."
        
"I shunted once," says Gawayne, "but will no
        more. 2280

          Quod G:, "I schunt oneȝ,
        

          & so wyl I no more,
        

          Bot paȝ my hede falle on þe stoneȝ,
        

          I con not hit restore.
        



      XIII.
    


Bring me to the point; deal me my destiny at
        once." 2284

          Bot busk, burne, bi þi fayth, & bryng me to þe poynt,
        

          Dele to me my destiné, & do hit out of honde,
        

          For I schal stonde þe a strok, & start no more,
        

          Til þyn ax haue me hitte, haf here my trawþe."
        
"Have at thee, then," says the other.
2288

          "Haf at þe þenne," quod þat oþer, &
          heueȝ hit alofte,
        

          & wayteȝ as wroþely, as he wode were;
        
With that he aims at him a blow.

          He mynteȝ at hym maȝtyly, bot not þe mon ryueȝ,1


          With-helde heterly h[i]s honde, er hit hurt myȝt.
        
Gawayne never flinches, but stands as still as a
        stone. 2292

          Gawayn grayþely hit bydeȝ, & glent with no
          membre,
        

          Bot stode stylle as þe ston, oþer a stubbe auþer,
        

          Þat raþeled is in roche grounde, with roteȝ
          a hundreth.
        

          Þen muryly efte con he mele, þe mon in þe grene,
        
"Now," says the Green Knight, "I must hit thee,
        since thy heart is whole." 2296

          "So now þou hatȝ þi hert holle, hitte me bihou[e]s;
        

          Halde þe now þe hyȝe hode, þat Arþur þe raȝt,
        

          & kepe þy kanel at þis kest, ȝif hit keuer may."
        

          G: ful gryndelly with greme þenne sayde,
        
"Thrash on," says the other. 2300

          "Wy þresch on, þou þro mon, þou þreteȝ to longe,
        

          I hope þat þi hert arȝe wyth þyn awen seluen."
        

          "For soþe," quod þat oþer freke, "so felly þou
          spekeȝ,
        

          I wyl no lenger on lyte lette þin ernde,
        
2304

          riȝt nowe."
        
Then the Green Knight makes ready to strike.

          Þenne tas he2 hym stryþe to stryke,
        

          & frounses boþe lyppe & browe,
        

          No meruayle þaȝ hym myslyke,
        
2308

          Þat hoped of no rescowe.
        


1 ? ryneȝ = touches. 2 he he, in MS.
      


      XIV.
    


He let fall his loom on the bare

          He lyftes lyȝtly his lome, & let hit doun fayre,
        
[Fol. 122.]neck of Sir Gawayne.

          With þe barbe of þe bitte bi þe bare nek
        

          Þaȝ he homered heterly, hurt hym no more,
        
2312

          Bot snyrt hym on þat on syde, þat seuered þe hyde;
        
The sharp weapon pierced the flesh so that the
        blood flowed.

          Þe scharp schrank to þe flesche þurȝ þe schyre grece,
        

          Þat þe schene blod over his schulderes schot to þe erþe.
        
When the knight saw the blood on the snow,

          & quen þe burne seȝ þe blode blenk on þe snawe,
        
2316

          He sprit forth spenne fote more þen a spere lenþe,
        

          Hent heterly his helme, & on his hed cast,
        

          Schot with his schuldereȝ his fayre schelde vnder,
        
he unsheathed his sword, and thus spake:

          Braydeȝ out a bryȝt sworde, & bremely he spekeȝ;
        
2320

          Neuer syn þat he watȝ burne borne of his moder,
        

          Watȝ he neuer in þis worlde, wyȝe half so
          blyþe:—
        
"Cease, man, of thy blow.

          "Blynne, burne, of þy bur, bede me no mo;
        

          I haf a stroke in þis sted with-oute stryf hent,
        
If thou givest me any more, readily shall I
        requite thee. 2324

          & if þow recheȝ me any mo, I redyly schal quyte,
        

          & ȝelde ȝederly aȝayn, & þer to ȝe
          tryst,
        

          & foo;
        
Our agreement stipulates only one stroke."

          Bot on stroke here me falleȝ,
        
2328

          Þe couenaunt schop ryȝt so,
        

          [Sikered]1 in Arþureȝ halleȝ,
        

          & þer-fore, hende, now hoo!"
        


1 Illegible.
      


      XV.
    


The Green Knight rested on his axe,

          The haþel heldet hym fro, & on his ax rested,
        
2332

          Sette þe schaft vpon schore, & to be scharp lened,
        
looked on Sir Gawayne, who appeared bold and
        fearless,

          & loked to þe leude, þat on þe launde ȝede,
        

          How þat doȝty dredles deruely þer stondeȝ,
        

          Armed ful aȝleȝ; in hert hit hym lykeȝ.
        
2336

          þenn he meleȝ muryly, wyth a much steuen,
        
and addressed him as follows: "Bold knight, be
        not so wroth,

          & wyth a r[a]ykande rurde he to þe renk sayde,
        

          "Bolde burne, on þis bent be not so gryndel;
        

          No mon here vn-manerly þe mys-boden habbe,
        
2340

          Ne kyd, bot as couenaunde, at kyngeȝ kort schaped;
        
I promised thee a stroke and thou hast it, be
        satisfied.

          I hyȝt þe a strok, & þou hit hatȝ, halde þe wel
          payed,
        

          I relece þe of þe remnaunt, of ryȝtes alle oþer;
        

          Ȝif1 I deliuer had bene, a boffet, paraunter,
        
I could have dealt worse with thee. 2344

          I couþe wroþeloker haf waret, [&] to þe haf wroȝt anger.2


          Fyrst I mansed þe muryly, with a mynt one,
        
I menaced thee with one blow for the covenant

          & roue þe wyth no rof, sore with ryȝt I þe profered,
        
[Fol. 122b.] between us on the first
        night.

          For þe forwarde that we fest in þe fyrst nyȝt,
        
2348

          & þou trystyly þe trawþe & trwly me haldeȝ,
        

          Al þe gayne þow me gef, as god mon shulde;
        
Another I aimed at thee because thou kissedst my
        wife.

          Þat oþer munt for þe morne, mon, I þe profered,
        

          Þou kyssedes my clere wyf, þe cosseȝ me raȝteȝ,
        
2352

          For boþe two here I þe bede bot two bare myntes,
        

          boute scaþe;
        
A true man should restore truly, and then he need
        fear no harm.

          Trwe mon trwe restore,
        

          Þenne þar mon drede no waþe;
        
Thou failedst at the third time, and therefore
        take thee that tap. (See l. 1861.) 2356

          At þe þrid þou fayled þore,
        

          & þer-for þat tappe ta þe.
        


1 uf, in MS. 2 This word is doubtful.
      


      XVI.
    


For my weed (woven by my wife) thou wearest.

          For hit is my wede þat þou wereȝ, þat ilke wouen
          girdel,
        

          Myn owen wyf hit þe weued, I wot wel forsoþe;
        
I know thy kisses and my wife's wooing.
2360

          Now know I wel þy cosses, & þy costes als,
        

          & þe wowyng of my wyf, I wroȝt hit myseluen;
        
I sent her to try thee, and faultless I found
        thee.

          I sende hir to asay þe, & sothly me þynkkeȝ,
        

          On þe fautlest freke, þat euer on fote ȝede;
        
2364

          As perle bi þe quite pese is of prys more,
        

          So is Gawayn, in god fayth, bi oþer gay knyȝteȝ.
        
But yet thou sinnedst a little,

          Bot here you lakked a lyttel, sir, & lewte yow wonted,
        

          Bot þat watȝ for no wylyde werke, ne wowyng nauþer,
        
for love of thy life." 2368

          Bot for ȝe lufed your lyf, þe lasse I yow blame."
        

          Þat oþer stif mon in study stod a gret whyle;
        

          So agreued for greme he gryed with-inne,
        
Gawayne stands confounded.

          Alle þe blode of his brest blende in his face,
        
2372

          Þat al he schrank for schome, þat þe schalk talked.
        

          Þe forme worde vpon folde, þat þe freke meled,—
        
"Cursed," he says, "be cowardice and covetousness
        both!"

          "Corsed worth cowarddyse & couetyse boþe!
        

          In yow is vylany & vyse, þat vertue disstryeȝ."
        
Then he takes off the girdle and throws it to the
        knight. 2376

          Þenne he kaȝt to þe knot, & þe kest lawseȝ,
        

          Brayde broþely þe belt to þe burne seluen:
        

          "Lo! þer þe falssyng, foule mot hit falle!
        
He curses his cowardice,

          For care of þy knokke cowardyse me taȝt
        
2380

          To a-corde me with couetyse, my kynde to for-sake,
        

          Þat is larges & lewte, þat longeȝ to knyȝteȝ.
        
and confesses himself to have been guilty of
        untruth.

          Now am I fawty, & falce, & ferde haf ben euer;
        

          Of trecherye & vn-trawþe boþe bityde sorȝe
        
2384

          & care!
        
[Fol. 123.]

          I bi-knowe yow, knyȝt, here stylle,
        

          Al fawty is my fare,
        

          Leteȝ me ouer-take your wylle,
        
2388

          & efle I schal be ware."
        



      XVII.
    


Then the other, laughing, thus spoke:

          Thenne loȝe þat oþer leude, & luflyly sayde,
        

          "I halde hit hardily1 hole, þe harme þat I hade;
        
"Thou art confessed so clean,

          Þou art confessed so clene, be-knowen of þy mysses,
        
2392

          & hatȝ þe penaunce apert, of þe poynt of myn
          egge,
        
that I hold thee as pure as if thou hadst never
        been guilty.

          I halde þe polysed of þat plyȝt, & pured as clene,
        

          As þou hadeȝ neuer forfeted, syþen þou
          watȝ fyrst borne.
        
I give thee, sir, the gold-hemmed girdle,

          & I gif þe, sir, þe gurdel þat is golde hemmed;
        
2396

          For hit is grene as my goune, sir G:, ȝe maye
        

          Þenk vpon þis ilke þrepe, þer þou forth þryngeȝ
        

          Among prynces of prys, & þis a pure token
        
as a token of thy adventure at the Green Chapel.

          Of þe chaunce of þe grene chapel, at cheualrous knyȝteȝ;
        
Come again to my abode, and abide there for the
        remainder of the festival." 2400

          & ȝe schal in þis nwe ȝer aȝayn to my woneȝ,
        

          & we schyn reuel þe remnaunt of þis ryche fest,
        

          ful bene."
        

          Þer laþed hym fast þe lorde,
        
2404

          & sayde, "with my wyf, I wene,
        

          We schal yow wel acorde,
        

          Þat watȝ your enmy kene."
        


1 hardilyly, in MS.
      


      XVIII.
    


"Nay, forsooth," says Gawayne,

          "Nay, for soþe," quod þe segge, & sesed hys helme,
        
2408

          & hatȝ hit of hendely, & þe haþel þonkkeȝ,
        
"I have sojourned sadly, but bliss betide thee!

          "I haf soiorned sadly, sele yow bytyde,
        

          & he ȝelde hit yow ȝare, þat ȝarkkeȝ al menskes!
        
Commend me to your comely wife and that other
        lady who have beguiled me.

          & comaundeȝ me to þat cortays, your comlych
          fere,
        
2412

          Boþe þat on & þat oþer, myn honoured ladyeȝ.
        

          Þat þus hor knyȝt wyth hor kest han koyntly
          bigyled.
        
But it is no marvel for a man to be brought to
        grief through a woman's wiles.

          Bot hit is no ferly, þaȝ a fole madde,
        

          & þurȝ wyles of wymmen be wonen to sorȝe;
        
Adam, Solomon, Samson, and David were beguiled by
        women. 2416

          For so watȝ Adam in erde with one bygyled,
        

          & Salamon with fele sere, & Samson eft soneȝ,
        

          Dalyda dalt hym hys wyrde, & Dauyth þer-after


          Watȝ blended with Barsabe, þat much bale þoled.
        
How could a man love them and believe them not?
2420

          Now þese were wrathed wyth her wyles, hit were a wynne
          huge,
        

          To luf hom wel, & leue hem not, a leude þat couþe,
        
[Fol. 123b.]

          For þes wer forne1 þe freest þat folȝed alle þe sele,
        

          Ex-ellently of alle þyse oþer, vnder heuen-ryche,
        
2424

          þat mused;
        

          & alle þay were bi-wyled,
        

          With2 wymmen þat þay vsed,
        
Though I be now beguiled, methinks I should be
        excused.

          Þaȝ I be now bigyled,
        
2428

          Me þink me burde be excused."
        


1 forme (?) 2 with wyth, in MS.
      


      XIX.
    


But God reward you for your girdle.

          "Bot your gordel," quod G: "God yow for-ȝelde!
        

          Þat wyl I welde wyth good wylle, not for þe wynne golde,
        

          Ne þe saynt, ne þe sylk, ne þe syde pendaundes,
        
2432

          For wele, ne for worchyp, ne for þe wlonk werkkeȝ,
        
I will wear it in remembrance of my fault.

          Bot in syngne of my surfet I schal se hit ofte;
        

          When I ride in renoun, remorde to myseluen
        

          Þe faut & þe fayntyse of þe flesche crabbed,
        
2436

          How tender hit is to entyse teches of fylþe;
        
And when pride shall prick me,

          & þus, quen pryde schal me pryk, for prowes of armes,
        
a look to this lace shall abate it.

          Þe loke to þis luf lace schal leþe my hert.
        

          Bot on I wolde yow pray, displeses yow neuer;
        
2440

          Syn ȝe be lorde of þe ȝonde[r] londe, þer I haf lent
          inne,
        

          Wyth yow wyth worschyp,—þe wyȝe hit yow ȝelde
        

          Þat vp-haldeȝ þe heuen, & on hyȝ sitteȝ,—
        
But tell me your right name and I shall have
        done."

          How norne ȝe yowre ryȝt nome, & þenne no more?"
        
2444

          "Þat schal I telle þe trwly," quod þat oþer þenne,
        
The Green Knight replies, "I am called Bernlak de
        Hautdesert, through might of Morgain la Fey, the pupil of Merlin.

          "Bernlak de Hautdesert I hat in þis londe,
        

          Þurȝ myȝt of Morgne la Faye, þat in my hous
          lenges,
        

          &1 koyntyse of clergye, bi craftes wel lerned,
        
2448

          Þe maystres of Merlyn, mony ho2 taken;
        

          For ho hatȝ dalt drwry ful dere sum tyme,
        

          With þat conable klerk, þat knowes alle your knyȝteȝ
        

          at hame;
        
2452

          Morgne þe goddes,
        

          Þer-fore hit is hir name;
        
She can tame even the haughtiest.

          Weldeȝ non so hyȝe hawtesse,
        

          Þat ho ne con make ful tame.
        


1 in (?). 2 ho hatȝ (?).
      


      XX.
    


It was she who caused me to test the renown of
        the Round Table, 2456

          Ho wayned me vpon þis wyse to your wynne halle,
        

          For to assay þe surquidre, ȝif hit soth were,
        

          Þat rennes of þe grete renoun of þe Rounde Table;
        

          Ho wayned me þis wonder, your wytteȝ to reue,
        
[Fol. 124.]hoping to grieve Guenever and
        cause her death through fear. 2460

          For to haf greued Gaynour, & gart hir to dyȝe.
        

          With gopnyng1 of þat ilke gomen, þat
          gostlych speked,
        

          With his hede in his honde, bifore þe hyȝe
          table.
        

          Þat is ho þat is at home, þe auncian lady;
        
She is even thine aunt. 2464

          Ho is euen þyn aunt, Arþureȝ half suster,
        

          Þe duches doȝter of Tyntagelle, þat dere Vter after

Therefore come to her and make merry in my
        house."

          Hade Arþur vpon, þat aþel is nowþe.
        

          Þerfore I eþe þe, haþel, to com to þy naunt,
        
2468

          Make myry in my hous, my meny þe louies,
        

          & I wol þe as wel, wyȝe, bi my faythe,
        

          As any gome vnder God, for þy grete trauþe."
        
Gawayne refuses to return with the Green Knight.

          & he nikked hym naye, he nolde bi no wayes;
        
2472

          Þay acolen & kyssen, [bikennen] ayþer oþer


          To þe prynce of paradise, & parten ryȝt þere,
        

          on coolde;
        
On horse full fair he bends to Arthur's hall.

          Gawayn on blonk ful bene,
        
2476

          To þe kyngeȝ burȝ buskeȝ bolde,
        

          & þe knyȝt in þe enker grene,
        

          Whider-warde so euer he wolde.
        


1 glopnyng (?).
      


      XXI.
    


Wild ways now Gawayne rides.

          Wylde wayeȝ in þe worlde Wowen now rydeȝ,
        
2480

          On Gryngolet, þat þe grace hade geten of his lyue;
        
Oft he harboured in house and oft thereout.

          Ofte he herbered in house, & ofte al þeroute,
        

          & mony a-venture in vale, & venquyst ofte,
        

          Þat I ne tyȝt, at þis tyme, in tale to remene.
        
The wound in his neck became whole. 2484

          Þe hurt watȝ hole, þat he hade hent in his nek,
        
He still carried about him the belt,

          & þe blykkande belt he bere þeraboute,
        

          A belef as a bauderyk, bounden bi his syde,
        

          Loken vnder his lyfte arme, þe lace, with a knot,
        
in token of his fault. 2488

          In tokenyng he watȝ tane in tech of a faute;
        
Thus he comes to the Court of King Arthur.

          & þus he commes to þe court, knyȝt al in
          sounde.
        
Great then was the joy of all.

          Þer wakned wele in þat wone, when wyst þe grete,
        

          Þat gode G: watȝ commen, gayn hit hym þoȝt;
        
The king and his knights ask him concerning his
        journey. 2492

          Þe kyng kysseȝ þe knyȝt, & þe whene alce,
        

          & syþen mony syker knyȝt, þat soȝt hym to haylce,
        
Gawayne tells them of his adventures,

          Of his fare þat hym frayned, & ferlyly he telles;
        

          Biknowoȝ alle þe costes of care þat he hade,—
        
2496

          Þe chaunce of þe chapel, þe chere of þe knyȝt,
        
[Fol. 124b.]the love of the lady, and
        lastly of the lace.

          Þe luf of þe ladi, þe lace at þe last.
        

          Þe nirt in þe nek he naked hem schewed,
        
He showed them the cut in his neck.

          Þat he laȝt for his vnleute at þe leudes hondes,
        
2500

          for blame;
        

          He tened quen he schulde telle,
        
He groaned for grief and shame, and the blood
        rushed into his face.

          He groned for gref & grame;
        

          Þe blod in his face con melle,
        
2504

          When he hit schulde schewe, for schame.
        



      XXII.
    


"Lo!" says he, handling the lace, "this is the
        band of blame,

          "Lo! lorde," quod þe leude, & þe lace hondeled,
        

          "Þis is þe bende of þis blame I bere [in] my nek,
        

          Þis is þe laþe & þe losse, þat I laȝt haue,
        
a token of my cowardice and covetousness,
2508

          Of couardise & couetyse, þat I haf caȝt þare,
        

          Þis is þe token of vn-trawþe, þat I am tan inne,
        
I must needs wear it as long as I live."

          & I mot nedeȝ hit were, wyle I may last;
        

          For non may hyden his harme, bot vnhap ne may hit,
        
2512

          For þer hit oneȝ is tachched, twynne wil hit neuer."
        
The king comforts the knight, and all the court
        too.

          Þe kyng comforteȝ þe knyȝt, & alle þe court
          als,
        

          Laȝen loude þer-at, & luflyly acorden,
        

          Þat lordes & ladis, þat longed to þe Table,
        
Each knight of the brotherhood agrees to wear a
        bright green belt, 2516

          Vche burne of þe broþer-hede a bauderyk schulde haue,
        

          A bende, a belef hym aboute, of a bryȝt grene,
        
for Gawayne's sake,

          & þat, for sake of þat segge, in swete to were.
        

          For þat watȝ acorded þe renoun of þe Rounde Table,
        
who ever more honoured it. 2520

          & he honoured þat hit hade, euer-more after,
        

          As hit is breued in þe best boke of romaunce.
        
Thus in Arthur's day this adventure befell.

          Þus in Arthurus day þis aunter
          bitidde,
        

          Þe Brutus bokees þer-of beres wyttenesse;
        
2524

          Syþen Brutus, þe bolde burne, boȝed hider fyrst,
        

          After þe segge & þe asaute watȝ sesed at Troye,
        

          I-wysse;
        

          Mony auntereȝ here bi-forne,
        
2528

          Haf fallen suche er þis:
        
He that bore the crown of thorns bring us to His
        bliss!

          Now þat bere þe croun of þorne,
        

          He bryng vus to his blysse! AMEN.
        




      NOTES.
    



          Line 8
        

              Ricchis turns, goes,     The
          king ...   Ricchis his reynys and the Renke
          metys:   Girden to gedur with þere grete speires.—T.B.
          l. 1232.
        



          37
        

    Þis kyng lay at Camylot vpon kryst-masse.
Camalot, in Malory's "Morte Arthure," is said to be the same as
          Winchester. Ritson supposes it to be Caer-went, in
          Monmouthshire, and afterwards confounded with Caer-wynt, or Winchester.
          But popular tradition here seems the best guide, which assigned the
          site of Camalot to the ruins of a castle on a hill, near the church of
          South Cadbury, in Somersetshire (Sir F. Madden).
        



          65
        

    Nowel nayted o-newe, neuened ful ofte.
            Christmas celebrated anew, mentioned full often. Sir
          F. Madden leaves the word nayted unexplained in his Glossary to
          "Syr Gawayne."
        



          124
        

syluener = sylueren, i.e. silver dishes.
        



          139
        

lyndes = lendes, loins.
        



          142
        

in his muckel, in his greatness.
        



          184
        

          Watȝ euesed al umbe-torne—? was trimmed, all cut evenly
          around; umbe-torne may be an error for vmbe-corue = cut
          round.
        



          216
        

in gracios werkes. Sir F. Madden reads gracons for gracios,
          and suggests Greek as the meaning of it.
        



          244-5
        

    As al were slypped vpon slepe so slaked hor
          loteȝ         in hyȝe.
              As all were fallen asleep so ceased their
          words         in haste
          (suddenly). Sir F. Madden reads slaked horloteȝ,
          instead of slaked hor loteȝ, which, according to his
          glossary, signifies drunken vagabonds. He evidently takes horloteȝ
          to be another (and a very uncommon) form of harloteȝ = harlots.
          But harlot, or vagabond, would be a very inappropriate term to
          apply to the noble Knights of the Round Table. Moreover, slaked
          never, I think, means drunken. The general sense of the verb slake
          is to let loose, lessen, cease. Cf. lines 411-2, where sloke,
          another form of slake, occurs with a similar meaning:
              — layt no fyrre; bot slokes.
              — seek no further, but stop (cease).
          Sir F. Madden suggests blows as the explanation of slokes.
          It is, however, a verb in the imperative mood.
        



          286
        

Brayn. Mätzner suggests brayn-wod.
        



          296
        

barlay = par loi. This word is exceedingly common in the T.
          Book (see l. 3391).     I bid you now,
          barlay, with besines at all     Þat ye
          set you most soverainly my suster to gete.—T.B. l. 2780.
        



          394
        

siker. Sir F. Madden reads swer.
        



          440
        

bluk. Sir F. Madden suggests blunk (horse). I am
          inclined to keep to the reading of the MS., and explain bluk as
          = bulk = trunk. Cf. the use of the word Blok in "Early
          English Alliterative Poems," p. 100, l. 272.
        



          558
        

derue doel, etc. = great grief. Sir F. Madden reads derne,
          i.e. secret, instead of derue (= derf). Cf. line 564.
        



          577
        

knaged, fastened.     The braunches
          were borly, sum of bright gold,     With
          leuys full luffly, light of the same;     With
          burions aboue bright to beholde;     And
          fruit on yt fourmyt of fairest of shap,     Of
          mony kynd that was knyt, knagged aboue.—T.B. l. 4973.
        



          629
        

              & ay quere hit is endeleȝ,
          etc.     And everywhere it is endless,
          etc. Sir F. Madden reads emdeleȝ, i.e. with equal
          sides.
        



          652
        

for-be = for-bi = surpassing, beyond.
        



          681
        

          for Hadet read Halet = haled = exiled (?). See
          line 1049.
        



          806
        

auinant = auenaunt, pleasantly. Sir F. Madden reads amnant.
        



          954
        

of. Should we not read on (?).
        



          957
        

    Þat oþer wyth a gorger watȝ gered ouer
          þe swyre. The gorger or wimple is stated first
          to have appeared in Edward the First's reign, and an example is found
          on the monument of Aveline, Countess of Lancaster, who died in 1269.
          From the poem, however, it would seem that the gorger was
          confined to elderly ladies (Sir F. Madden)
        



          968
        

              More lykker-wys on to lyk,     Watȝ
          þat scho had on lode.     A more pleasant
          one to like,     Was that (one) she had under
          her control.
        



          988
        

tayt = lively, and hence pleasant, agreeable.
        



          1015
        

in vayres, in purity.
        



          1020
        

dut = dunt (?) = dint (?), referring to sword-sports.
        



          1022
        

sayn[t] Ioneȝ day. This is the 27th of December, and the
          last of the feast. Sometimes the Christmas festivities were prolonged
          to New Year's Day (Sir F. Madden).
        



          1047
        

derne dede = secret deed. I would prefer to read derue dede
          = great deed. Cf. lines 558, 564.
        



          1053
        

I wot in worlde, etc. = I not (I know not) in worlde,
          etc.
        



          1054
        

              I nolde, bot if I hit negh myȝt on nwȝeres
          morne,     For alle þe londe in-wyth
          Logres, etc. I would not [delay to set out], unless I might
          approach it on New Year's morn, for all the lands within England, etc.
        



          1074
        

in spenne = in space = in the interval = meanwhile. See
          line 1503.
        



          1160
        

slentyng of arwes. Sir F. Madden reads sleutyng.
              "Of drawyn swordis sclentyng to and
          fra,     The brycht mettale, and othir
          armouris seir,     Quharon the sonnys blenkis
          betis cleir,     Glitteris and schane, and
          vnder bemys brycht,     Castis ane new
          twynklyng or a lemand lycht."         (G.
          Douglas' Æneid, Vol. i, p. 421.)
        



          1281
        

let lyk = appeared pleased.
        



          1283
        

              Þaȝ I were burde bryȝtest, þe
          burde in mynde hade, etc. The sense requires us to read:
              Þaȝ ho were burde bryȝtest, þe
          burne in mynde hade, etc. i.e., Though she were lady fairest,
          the knight in mind had, etc.
        



          1440
        

              Long sythen [seuered] for þe sounder þat wiȝt
          for-olde Long since separated from the sounder or herd
          that fierce (one) for-aged (grew very old).     "Now
          to speke of the boore, the fyrste year he is     A
          pygge of the sounder callyd, as haue I blys;     The
          secounde yere an hogge, and soo shall he be,     And
          an hoggestere, whan he is of yeres thre;     And
          when he is foure yere, a boor shall he be,     From
          the sounder of the swyne thenne departyth he;     A
          synguler is he soo, for alone he woll go."         (Book
          of St. Alban's, ed. 1496, sig. d., i.)
        



          1476
        

totes = looks, toots.     Sho went up
          wightly by a walle syde.     To the toppe of
          a toure and tot ouer the water.—T.B. l. 862.




          1623
        

          A verb [? lalede = cried] seems wanting after lorde.
        



          1702
        

fnasted, breathed.     These balfull
          bestes were, as the boke tellus,     Full
          flaumond of fyre with fnastyng of logh.—T.B. l. 168.
        



          1710
        

a strothe rande = a rugged path. Cf. the phrases tene greue,
          l. 1707; roȝe greue, l. 1898.
        



          1729
        

bi lag = be-lagh(?) = below (?).
        



          1719
        

              Thenne watȝ hit lif vpon list,
          etc. Should we not read:     Thenne
          watȝ hit list vpon lif, etc. i.e., Then was there joy in
          life, etc.
        



          1780
        

lyf = lef(?), beloved (one).
        



          1869
        

              Ho hatȝ kyst þe knyȝt so toȝt.
            She has kissed the knight so courteous. Sir F.
          Madden explains toȝt, promptly. Toȝt seems to
          be the same as the Northumbrian taght in the following extract
          from the "Morte Arthure":     "There come in
          at the fyrste course, before the kyng seluene,     Bare
          hevedys that ware bryghte, burnyste with sylver,     Alle
          with taghte mene and towne in togers fulle ryche."—(p. 15.)
          The word towne (well-behaved) still exists in wan-ton,
          the original meaning of which was ill-mannered, ill-bred.
        



          1909
        

bray houndeȝ = braþ houndeȝ, i.e. fierce
          hounds.
        



          1995
        

He hatȝ nere þat he soȝt = He watȝ nere þat
          he soȝt = He was near to that which he sought.
        



          2160
        

gedereȝ þe rake = takes the path or way.
        



          2167
        

              Þe skweȝ of þe scowtes skayued hym þoȝt.
          The shadows of the hills appeared wild (desolate) to him. Sir F.
          Madden reads skayned, of which he gives no explanation. Skayued
          = skayfed, seems to be the N. Prov. English scafe, wild.
          Scotch schaivie, wild, mad. O.N. skeifr. Sw. skef,
          awry, distorted.
        



          2204
        

ronge = clattered.
        



          2211
        

              Drede dotȝ me no lote =
              No noise shall cause me to dread (fear).
        



          2357
        

              & þer-for þat tappe ta þe.
              And therefore take thee that tap. ta
          þe = take thee. Sir F. Madden reads taþe = taketh. See l. 413,
          where to þe rhymes with sothe. We have no imperatives in
          th in this poem.
        



          2401
        

We schyn reuel, etc. Sir F. Madden reads wasch yn reuel.
          But schyn = shall. See Glossary to "Alliterative Poems."
        



          2474
        

on-coolde = on-colde = coldly = sorrowfully.
        



          2489    
        

in-sounde = soundly, well. Cf. in-blande = together; in-lyche,
          alike; inmyddeȝ, amidst.
        







End of Project Gutenberg's Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR GAWAYNE AND THE GREEN KNIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 14568-h.htm or 14568-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/5/6/14568/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Keith Edkins, David Widger
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.