Quinte Essence



body {margin-left: 8%; margin-right: 10%;}
hr {width: 80%;margin-top: 1em; margin-bottom: 1em;}
hr.tiny {width: 20%; margin-top: .5em; margin-bottom: .5em;}

p, div, td.maintext {line-height: 1.2em;}

/* headers */
h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {text-align: center; font-style: normal;
font-weight: normal; margin-top: .5em; margin-bottom: 1em;}

h1 {font-size: 200%; margin-bottom: .5em;}
h2 {font-size: 150%; margin-bottom: .5em;}
h3 {font-size: 125%;}
h4 {font-size: 115%;}
h5 {font-size: 100%;}
h6 {font-size: 90%;}

td {padding-top: 0em; padding-bottom: 0em; vertical-align: top;}
td.half {width: 50%; padding-right: 2em;}
td.small {font-size: 90%; vertical-align: bottom;}

/* table of contents */
table.toc {width: 80%; margin-left: auto; margin-right:
auto;}
td.number {font-size: 95%; text-align: right;}
.toc1, .toc2 {font-size: 95%; margin: 0em 2em .3em;}
.toc1 {text-indent: -2em;}

/* central text */
td.ednote {font-size: 90%; padding: .2em 1em 0 0;}
td.maintext {font-size: 100%; width: 60%; padding-right: 1em;}
td.sidenote {font-size: 90%; width: 25%; padding-top: .2em;}
p.notehead {border-bottom: thin solid; border-top: thin solid;
padding-top: .3em; padding-bottom: .3em; margin-top: .3em;
margin-bottom: .3em; font-style: italic;}
p.oldnote {margin-left: 1em; padding-bottom: .2em;}
p.explicit {text-align: center; font-size: 110%; font-weight: bold;}

/* anchors */
sup {line-height: 0em;}
a.note {text-decoration: none;}
a.tag {text-decoration: none; vertical-align: super; font-size: 80%;
line-height: .1em; padding-left: .1em; padding-right: .1em;}
a.gloss {text-decoration: none; border-bottom: thin dotted #999;
color: inherit; background-color: inherit;}

p {margin: 0em; text-align: left;}
p.fullwidth {margin: .6em 2em;}
p.text {margin-left: 4em; text-indent: -4em;}

div.null {line-height: .1em; margin: 0em; padding: 0em;}
/* to enclose spans as needed */

div.footnote {font-size: 95%; margin: .6em 4em;}
div.rightnote {text-align: right; margin: -.8em 3em 0em 0em;}

.glossary {margin: 0 0 .2em 1em; text-indent: -1em; font-size: 90%;}
.plus {margin-top: .8em;}

.inset {margin-left: 2em;}
.smallcaps {font-variant: small-caps;}
.firstletter {float: left; clear: left; padding: 0em;
margin: -.1em .1em -.3em 0; font-size: 250%; line-height: 1.2em;}
.character {border-bottom: thin solid #999;}

.pagenum {position: absolute; right: 95%; font-size: 95%;
font-weight: normal; font-style: normal; text-align: right;}
.mynote {background-color: #DDE; color: #000; padding: .5em;
margin: 1em 2em; font-family: sans-serif; font-size: 95%;}
.myinset {margin-left: 4em; font-size: 90%; font-family: sans-serif;
background-color: #DDE; color: #000; padding: .1em .2em .2em .3em;}
ins.correction {text-decoration: none; border-bottom: thin dotted red;}





﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Book Of Quinte Essence Or The Fifth
Being (1889), by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Book Of Quinte Essence Or The Fifth Being (1889)
       Edited from British Museum MS. Sloane 73 about 1460-70 A.D.

Author: Unknown

Editor: Frederick James Furnivall

Release Date: November 29, 2005 [EBook #17179]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF QUINTE ESSENCE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








This e-text uses a number of characters that depend on utf-8 encoding,
particularly yogh (ȝ) and thorn (þ). If they do not display properly,
you may have an incompatible browser or unavailable fonts. As a first
resort, try changing your browser’s default font.
The more unusual characters are underlined and identified with
popups.
Text in brackets [ ] is original; material added by the transcriber
is in braces { }. Further notes are given
at the end of this file.

The
Book of Quinte Essence
or
The Fifth Being;
That is to say,
Man’s Heaven.

A tretice in englisch breuely drawe out of þe book of quintis
eessencijs
in latyn, þat hermys þe prophete and
kyng of Egipt, after þe flood of Noe
fadir of philosophris, hadde by
reuelacioun of an aungil
of god to him
sende.
Edited from
British Museum MS. Sloane 73
about 1460-70 A.D.
by
FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL

Published for
THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY
by the
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON · NEW YORK · TORONTO




FIRST PUBLISHED1866


REVISED EDITION1889


REPRINTED1965




Original Series, No. 16

REPRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY RICHARD CLAY

(THE CHAUCER PRESS) LTD., BUNGAY, SUFFOLK

v
 


The odd account of the origin of this Treatise—in its first
lines—caught my eye as I was turning over the leaves of the Sloane
Manuscript which contains it. I resolved to print it as a specimen of
the curious fancies our forefathers believed in (as I suppose) in
Natural Science, to go alongside of the equally curious notions they put
faith in in matters religious. And this I determined on with no idea of
scoffing, or pride in modern wisdom; for I believe that as great
fallacies now prevail in both the great branches of knowledge and
feeling mentioned, as ever were held by man. Because once held by other
men, and specially by older Englishmen, these fancies and notions have,
or should have, an interest for all of us; and in this belief, one of
them is presented here.

The loss of my sweet, bright, only child, Eena, and other distress, have
prevented my getting up any cram on the subject of Quintessence to form
a regular Preface. The (translated?) original of the text is attributed
to Hermes—Trismegistus, “or the thrice great Interpreter,” so
called as “having three parts of the Philosophy of the whole world”1—to whom were
credited more works than he wrote. The tract appears to be a great fuss
about Alcohol or Spirits of Wine; how to make it,
vi
 
and get more or less tipsy on it, and what wonders it will work, from
making old men young, and dying men well, to killing lice.

The reading of the proof with the MS. was done by Mr. Edmund Brock, the
Society’s most careful and able helper. To Mr. Cockayne I am indebted
for the identification of some names of plants, &c.; and to Mr. Gill
of University College, London, for some Notes on the Chemistry of the
treatise, made at the request of my friend Mr. Moreshwar Atmaram.2 The Sloane MS. I judge
to be about, but after, a.d.3 The later copy (Harleian MS.
853, fol. 66) seems late 16th century or early 17th,3 and has been only collated for a few passages
which require elucidation. The pause marks of the MS. and text require
to be disregarded occasionally in reading.

Egham, 16th
May, 1866.

P.S. The short side-notes in inverted commas on and after p. 16 (save ‘5
Me’ and the like) are by a later hand in the MS. The
‘Spheres’ on p. 26, and the ‘Contents,’ p. vii-viii, are now
added.—F. 1889.


1. The Mirror of
Alchimy, composed by the thrice-famous and learned Fryer, Roger
Bachon, 1597.


2. Mr. M.A. Tarkhad
has been for many years Vice-Principal of the Rajkumar College, for the
sons of the native Chiefs of Rajkote.—1889.


3. Mr. E.A. Bond of
the British Museum has kindly looked at the MSS., and puts the Sloane at
1460-70 a.d., and the Harleian at about
1600.


vii
 
CONTENTS.

BOOK I.


PROLOG: GOD’S GREATEST SECRET
1


QUINTE ESSENCE DEFINED: ITS QUALITIES
2


HOW TO MAKE QUINTE ESSENCE
4


1ST WAY
4


2ND WAY
5


3RD WAY
5


4TH WAY
5


5TH WAY
6



HOW POOR EVANGELIC MEN MAY GET THE GRACIOUS INFLUENCE OF GOLD
6



HOW TO GILD BURNING WATER OR WINE MORE THOROUGHLY
7



HOW TO MAKE FIRE WITHOUT COALS, LIME, LIGHT, ETC.
8



HOW TO CALCINE GOLD
8



HOW TO SEPARATE GOLD FROM SILVER
9



HOW TO GET ITS QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF GOLD
9



HOW TO GET ITS QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF ANTIMONY
10



HOW TO GET ITS QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF MAN’S BLOOD
11



HOW TO GET ITS QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF THE 4 ELEMENTS
12



HOW TO FIX ALL EARTHLY THINGS IN OUR QUINTE ESSENCE
13


viii
 
BOOK II.



HOW TO MAKE AN OLD EVANGELIC MAN YOUNG
15



HOW TO CURE A MAN GIVEN UP BY DOCTORS
15



HOW TO CURE THE LEPROSY
16



HOW TO CURE THE PALSY
16



HOW TO FATTEN LEAN AND CONSUMPTIVE MEN
17



HOW TO CURE FRENSY, GOUT, AND TROUBLES FROM DEVILS, WICKED THOUGHTS,
ETC.
17



HOW OUR QUINTE ESSENCE IS HEAVEN
19



HOW TO CURE THE GOUT
19



HOW TO CURE THE ITCH, AND KILL LICE
19



HOW TO CURE QUARTAN FEVER
20



HOW TO CURE CONTINUAL (CHRONIC) FEVER
21



HOW TO CURE TERTIAN FEVER
21



HOW TO CURE DAILY OR QUOTIDIAN FEVER
21



HOW TO CURE AGUE, FEVER, AND LUNACY
22



HOW TO CURE FRENZY AND MADNESS
22



HOW TO CURE CRAMP
22



HOW TO CAST POISON OUT OF A MAN’S BODY
23



HOW TO MAKE A COWARD BOLD AND STRONG
23



HOW TO CURE PESTILENTIAL FEVER
23



HOW THIS QUINTE ESSENCE IS FOR HOLY MEN ONLY
25








THE SPHERES AND THE PLANETS
26



MR. GILL’S NOTES ON THE CHEMISTRY OF THE TEXT
27



GLOSSARY
29




1
 
THE BOOK OF QUINTE ESSENCE
OR THE FIFTH BEING;
THAT IS TO SAY,
MAN’S HEAVEN.
[Sloane MS. 73, fol. 10. Brit. Mus.]

BOOK I.



[Fol. 10.]


With þe myȝt, wisdom, & grace of
þe holy trynite, I write to ȝou a tretice in englisch breuely drawe out
of þe book of quintis essencijs in latyn, þat hermys þe
prophete and kyng of Egipt, after the flood of Noe, fadir
of philosophris, hadde by reuelacioun of an aungil of god to him
sende, þat þe wijsdom and þe science of þis book schulde not
perische, but be kept and preserued vnto þe eende of þe
world, of alle holy men from al wickid peple and tyrauntis, for greet
perilis þat myȝte falle þerof. For wiþinne þis breue
tretis, wiþ þe grace of god, I wole more determine of practif1 þan of theorik. ȝitt
ben boþe nedeful /


By the grace of God I translate you this Treatise revealed to Hermes by
an angel after Noah’s flood, that the knowledge of this book may be
preserved to the end of the world.





The firste and souereyneste priuyte þat god, maker of kynde, ordeyned for mannys
nede, how þat olde euangelik men, and feble in kynde, myȝte be restorid,
and haue aȝen her firste strenkþis of ȝongþe in þe same degree þat is in
al kynde, & be mad hool parfiȝtly,

God’s greatest secret for man’s need is how to restore old feeble men to
the strength of their youth,





except þe strok of þe þundir blast, & violent brusuris, and
oppressynge of to
myche betynge /
Also perilous fallyngis of hiȝ placis, to myche abstynence, &
oþere yuel gouernaunce aȝens kynde, And also þe teerme
þat is sett of god, þat noman may a-schape, as Iob seiþ in
latyn /



except in case of thunder-blast, and too much fasting, and the term set
for all men.





“Breues dies hominis sunt &c.”



‘Nota.’




2
 

THE NAMES AND QUALITIES OF QUINTE ESSENCE.


Forsoþe philosophoris clepen þe purest substaunce of manye
corruptible þingis elementid, ‘quinta essencia,’
þat is to seie, ‘mannys heuene,’ drawe out by craft of mani;2 for whi, as quinta
essencia superior, þat is, heuene of oure lord god,
in reward of
þe .iiij elementis, is yncorruptible & vnchaungeable /


The purest substance of corruptible things is Quinte Essence or man’s
heaven.




[* Fol. 10b.]


riȝt so *quinta essencia superior inferior, þat is
to seie, mannys heuene, is incorruptible, in reward of þe .4.
qualitees of mannys body; and so it is preued naturaly þat
oure quinta essencia, þat is, mannes heuene, in it-silf3 is incorruptible; and so it is
not hoot and drie wiþ fier /
ne coold and moist wiþ watir /
ne hoot & moist with eyr, ne coold and drie wiþ erþe;
but oure quinta essencia avayliþ to þe
contrarie, as heuene incorruptible /


Quinte Essence is incorruptible as to the four qualities of man’s body,





But vndirstonde þat oure qui[n]ta essencia
is nouȝt so incorruptible as is heuene of oure lord god; but it is
incorruptible in reward of composicioun maad of þe .4. elementis;


but not as the heaven of God.





& it hath .iij. names by the philosophoris, þat is to
seie /
brennynge watir /
þe soule in þe spirit of wyn, & watir of lijf /
But whanne ȝe wole concelle it, þanne schal ȝe clepe it ‘oure
quinta essencia’; for þis name, & þe nature
þerof, riȝt fewe philosophoris wolde schewe /
but sikurly þei biriede þe truþe with hem. and witiþ weel that it is
clepid brennynge watir; and it is no brennyng watir:


It is called, 1. Burning Water; 2. the Soul in the spirit of Wine; 3.
Water of Life; and if you wish to conceal it, Quinte Essence.





forwhi, it is not moist ne coold as comoun watir; for it
brenneþ, & so doiþ not comyn watir;


It is neither moist and cold like water,





ne it is nat hoot and moist as eir, for eir corrumpiþ a
þing a-noon, as it schewiþ weel by
generacioun of flies, & areins, and siche oþere; but
sikirly þis is alwey incorruptible, if it be kept cloos fro fliȝt /


nor hot and moist like air,





Also it is not coold and drie as erþe. for souereynly it worchiþ
& chaungiþ. And it is not hoot and drie as fier, as it schewiþ by
experience; for hoot þingis it keliþ, & hoot sijknessis it
doiþ awey /


nor cold and dry like earth, nor hot and dry like fire.




[* Fol. 11.]


Also þat it ȝeueþ incorruptibilite, and kepiþ a þing fro
corruptibilite *and rotynge, it is preued þus /
Forwhi. what pece of fleisch, fisch, or deed brid, be putt
þerinne, it schal not corru[m]pe ne rote whilis it is
þerinne /


It gives incorruptibility, for it prevents dead flesh from rotting,





miche more þanne it wole kepe quyk fleisch of mannys body from al
manere corruptibilite and rotynge /
This is oure quinta essencia, þat is to seie,
mannys heuene, þat god made to þe
3
 
conseruacioun of þe .4. qualitees of mannys body,
riȝt as he made his heuene to þe conseruacioun of al þe
world /


and much more the living flesh of man. It is Man’s Heaven, preserving
his body as Heaven does the world.





And wite ȝe for certeyn þat manye philosophoris and lechis þat ben now,
knowe nouȝt þis quinta essencia, ne þe truþe
þerof /
Forwhi; god wole not þat þei knowe it; for her greet
brennynge coueitise & vicious lyuynge /


Many know it not now for their covetousness and vice.




THE NATURE AND WORKING OF QUINTE ESSENCE.


Forsoþe quinta essencia superior, þat is to
seie, heuene of oure lord god bi him silf /
Aloone /
ȝeueþ not conseruacioun in þe world, and wondirful influence, but by þe
vertue of þe sunne, planetis, and oþere sterris;
riȝt so oure quinta essencia, þat is, mannys heuene, wole
be maad fair wiþ þe sunne mineralle, fynyd, schynynge,
incorruptibile; and euene in qualite þat fier may not appeire, corrumpe, ne
distroie. and þis is verry gold of þe myn, of þe erþe, or of þe
floodis gaderid /


But as God’s Heaven is aided by sun and stars, so our Heaven, or Quinte
Essence, is made fair by the sun mineral, or pure gold of the mine, not
of alchemy.





for gold of alkamy maad with corosyues distroieþ kynde, as
aristotle and manye oþere philosophoris prouen /



‘Nota.’





and þerfore good gold naturel, & of þe myn of þe erbe, is
clepid of philosophoris ‘sol’ in latyn; for he is þe sonne
of oure heuene, lich as sol þe planet is in þe heuene aboue; for þis
planete ȝeueþ to gold his influence, nature, colour, & a
substaunce incorruptible.


Good natural gold is called Sol, because Sol the planet gives
gold its power, colour, &c.




[* Fol. 11b.]


And oure quinta essencia, mannys heuene, is of þe nature
*& þe colour of heuene /
And oure sol, þat is, fyn gold of þe myne, schal make it fair,
riȝt as sol þe planete makiþ heuene fair /
and so þese two togidere ioyned schal ȝeue influence in us, and þe
condiciouns of heuene and of heuenly sonne /
in as miche as it is possible in deedly nature, conseruacioun and
restorynge of nature lost, & renewynge of ȝongþe /


Our Quinte Essence is the colour of heaven; gold makes it fair; and the
two work in us (so far as is possible) renewal of youth, and give health
plenteously.





And it schal ȝeue plenteuously heelþe: and so it is preued by
astronomy aboue, þat sterris þat haþ influence vpon þe heed and þe necke
of man /
as ben þe sterris of aries, taurus, and gemini, ȝeuen
influence syngulerly vpon̅ Gerapigra galieni /


As Aries, Taurus, and Gemini draw humours from the head and breast, and
not the limbs beneath,

‘Nota.’





And þerfore it haþ a synguler strenkþe, by þe ordynaunce
of god, to drawe awey þe superflue humouris fro þe heed, þe
necke, and þe brest, and not fro þe membris byneþe /
And so I seie of spicis þat drawiþ humouris fro þe knees, þe leggis, and
þe feet, þat resseyuen a synguler influence of þe sterris of
Capricorn, Aquarie and pisces, & riȝt so of oþere,
et cetera /


so those spices that do draw from these limbs get their power from
Capricorn, &c.





Comounne ȝe not þis book of deuyne secretes to
wickid men and auerous;
4
 
but kepe ȝe it in priuytee /


Tell not these Divine secrets to wicked men.




THE 1ST WAY TO MAKE QUINTE ESSENCE.


Take þe beste wiyn þat ȝe may fynde, if ȝe be of power; & if ȝe be
riȝt pore, þanne take corrupt wiyn, þat is, rotyn, of a
watery humour, but not egre, þat is, sour, for þe
quint essencia þerof is naturaly incorruptible þe
which ȝe schal drawe out by sublymacioun /
And þanne schal þer leue in þe ground of þe vessel
þe .4. elementis, as it were, rotun fecis of wiyn /



‘aqua vite’


To make Quinte Essence.
Take the best wine, or any not sour;
distil it, and the 4 Elements shall be left like dregs.




[* Fol. 12.]


But firste ȝe muste distille þis wiyn .7. tymes; & þanne haue
ȝe good brennynge watir /
Forsoþe, þis is þe watri mater *fro which is drawe oure
quinta essencia /


Distil 7 times to get Burning Water;





Thanne muste ȝe do make in þe furneis of aischin, a distillatorie
of glas al hool of oo.
pece, wiþ an hoole a-boue in þe heed, where þe watir schal be putt yn,
and be take out /
And þis is a wondirful instrument þat þat þing þat
by vertues of fier ascendith and distillith wiþinne þe
vessel, per canales brachiales, þat is, by pipis lich to
armys, be bore aȝen, and eftsoones ascendith, & eft descendiþ
contynuely day and nyȝt, til þe brennynge water heuenly be
turned into quintam essenciam /
And so bi continuelle ascenciouns &
discenciouns, þe quinta essencia is departid
fro þe corruptible composicioun of þe .4. elementis.



‘vas’
put this in a Distiller in a furnace, and let the vapour rise, condense,
and be distilled till it is turned into Quinte Essence, and parted from
the 4 elements.





For bifore þat þing þat is twies sublymed is more
glorified, and is more sotil, and fer from þe
corrumpcioun of þe .4. elementis more
separat þan whanne it ascendith but oonys;



‘Nota.’





and so vnto a þousand tymes, so þat by coutynuel ascendynge and
descendynge, by the which it is sublymed to so myche hiȝnes of
glorificacioun, it schal come þat it schal be a medicyn
incorruptible almoost as heuene aboue, and of þe nature of heuene /
And þerfore oure quinta essencia worþily is clepid
‘mannys heuene’ /


Distil it 1000 times, and it shall be glorified and become a medicine
incorruptible as heaven.





And aftir manye daies þat it hath be in þis sotil vessel of glas
distillid /
ȝe schulen opene þe hoole of þe vessel in þe heed þat
was selid with þe seel of lute of wijsdom, maad of þe sotillest
flour, and of white of eyren, and of moist papere, ymeyngid so
þat no þing respire out /


After many days unstop your distiller,

‘lute’




[* Fol. 12b.]


And whane ȝe opene þe hoole. if þer come out a passynge
heuenly swete flauour þat alle men þat
come yn naturely *drawe þerto. þanne ȝe haue oure quinta
essencia /


and if there issues out a heaven-sweet savour, you have our Quinte
Essence.





and ellis sele þe vessel, and putte it to þe fier aȝen til ȝe haue it.




If not, distil again till you have.




5
 
THE 2ND, 3RD, AND 4TH WAYS OF MAKING
QUINTE ESSENCE.


And anoþer maner worchinge of oure quinta essencia
is þis /
Take þe noblest and þe strengest brennynge watir þat ȝe
may haue distillid out of pure myȝty wiyn, and putte it into
a glas clepid ‘amphora, with a long necke /
and close þe mouþ strongly wiþ wex; And loke þat half or þe þridde
part be fulle; and birie it al in hors dounge,
preparate as it is seid hereafter /
so þat þe necke of þe glas be turned dounward, & þe
botum be turned vpward, þat by vertu of þe hors
dounge þe quinta essencia ascende vp to þe
botum. And þe grosté of þe mater of þe watir descende dounward
to þe necke /




The second way to make Quinte Essence.
Put the strongest Burning Water into an ‘amphora;’ seal it up; bury it
neck downwards in horse-dung, and the Quinte Essence will rise into the
globe and the impurities settle in the neck.





And aftir manye daies, whanne ȝe take it out, softly lift vp þe glas as
it stondith, and ȝe schal se in þickenes and cleernesse a difference
bitwene þe quintam essenciam sublymed, and
þe grose mater þat is in þe necke /
þe wondirful maistry of departynge of þat oon fro
þat oþer is þis /


Take the glass out of the dung;





Take a scharp poyntel, or a pricke of yren, & peerse into þe wex
þat hongiþ in þe mouþ of þe glas aȝens þe erþe /
and whanne ȝe haue peersid al fully to þe watir, take out
þe poyntel or þe pricke /


make a hole in the wax seal,





And þat erþely watir wole first come out þat is in þe
necke /
and so til it be come out vnto þe departinge bitwixe
it /
and þe quinte essence, þat is, mannys heuene
sublymed.


let out the impure earthy water,




[* Fol. 13.]


and whane ȝe se þat þis quint essence wole
renne & melte aftir þat þis erþely watir be voydid,
putte þanne swiftly ȝoure fyngir to þe hoole, & turne vp þe
glas, and þanne ȝe haue þerinne oure quinte
essence, *and þe erþely watir wiþoute aside.
And þis is a passyng souereyn priuytee.




and when the Quinte Essence would begin to run, turn the glass up, and
keep your Quinte Essence.





The þridde maner is, þat ȝe take a greet glas clepid
amphora, and seele it weel, and birie it weel in þe wombe of an
hors al togidere. and þe pureté of þe quinte essencie
schal be sublymed aboue, & þe grosté schal abide byneþe in þe
botme /
take out softli þat þat fletiþ a-boue; and þat þat leeueþ
bihynde, putte it to þe fier.






The third way.
Put your amphora into a horse’s belly instead of the dung, and proceed
as above.





The .iiij. maner is þis. take what vessel of glas þat ȝe
wole, or of erþe strongly glasid, and þer-vpon a round foot of
glas wiþ a leg. and seele þe vessel with his
couertour, þat þe rod of þe foot of þe glas wiþinne
þe vessel honge in þe eyr, þat þat þing þat
ascendith to þe couertour in þe maner of a pott boilynge
6
 
descende doun aȝen by þe foot of þe glas. and this instrument may ȝe do
make wiþoute greet cost /




The fourth way.
Substitute for the amphora a vessel of glass or earth, with a tube
running from the top and hanging in the air, into which the vapour may
fall and condense.




THE 5TH WAY TO MAKE QUINTE ESSENCE, &C.


The fifþe maner is, þat þe brennynge water be .10 tymes distillid
in hors dounge contynuely digest.






The
fifth way.
Distil your Burning Water ten times.







The science of makynge of fier wiþoute fier /
wherby ȝe
may make oure quinte essence wiþoute cost or traueile, and
withoute occupacioun and lesynge of
tyme /



To make fire without fire, and Quinte Essence without cost or
trouble.





Take þe beste horse dounge þat may be had þat is weel
digest, and putte it wiþine a uessel, or ellis a pitt maad wiþ þe erþe
anoyntid þoruȝout with past maad of aischin. And in
þis vessel or pitt, bete weel togidere þe dounge; And in
þe myddil of þis doung, sette þe vessel of
distillacioun vnto þe myddis or more /
For it is nede þat al þe heed of þe vessel be in þe coold
eir /


Put horse-dung into a vessel or pit lined with ashes, and place your
vessel in it up to the middle.




[* Fol. 13b.]


þat, þat þing þat bi vertu of þe fier
of þe doung þat ascendith þerby be turned into
watir *by vertu of cooldnes of þe eir and falle doun aȝen
and ascende vp aȝen. and þus ȝe haue fier wiþoute fier, and but wiþ
litil traueile.




The cold top part will condense the vapour caused by the heat of the
dung.





Also anoþer maner of fier. sette ȝoure vessel forseid to þe
strong reuerberacioun of þe sunne in somer tyme, and lete
it stonde þere nyȝt and day.




Or, place your vessel in the sun’s rays.





Here I wole teche ȝou how pore euangelik men may haue
wiþoute cost, and almoost for nouȝt, þe gracious influence of
gold, and þe maner of þe fixynge of it in oure heuene, þat is,
oure quinta essencia. 



How poor evangelic men may get the gracious influence of gold.





if ȝe be pore, ȝe schal preie a riche man þat is ȝoure
freend to leene ȝou a good floreyn of florence /
and anele it
vpon a plate of yren as yren is anelid. and haue biside ȝou a uessel of
erþe glasid, fillid ful of the beste brennynge watir þat ȝe may fynde.
& caste into þe watir þe floreyn anelid. and loke þat ȝe haue a
sotilte and a sleiȝþe to quenche sodeynly þe fier, þat þe watir waaste
not; and be weel war þat non yren touche þe watir. but af[t]er
caste into þe watir þe floreyn,


Borrow a Florence florin of a rich friend, anneal [?heat] it on a plate
of iron, and throw it into some Burning Water, taking care to quench the
fire quickly to prevent the Water wasting.





and do so .l. tymes or more, for þe oftere þe bettere it is /
And if ȝe se þat þe watir waaste to myche, chaunge it þanne, and
take newe, & do so ofte tymes. and whanne ȝe haue do ȝoure quenchour, putte
all þe watris togidere /


Repeat this 50 times in fresh Water, and then mix all the Waters
together.




HOW TO GILD BURNING WATER OR WINE.
[* Fol. 14.]


And ȝe schulen vndirstonde þat þe vertu of brennynge
watir is sich þat naturely it drawiþ out of
7
 
gold alle þe vertues & propirtees of it, & it
holdiþ incorrumptibilitee
& an euene heete.

The Water draws out all the properties of the gold.





*þanne meynge þis brennynge watir þus giltid wiþ oure quinte
essence, and vse it. but be war þat ȝe quenche not þe
floreyn in oure quinte essence; for þanne it were
lost /


Mix the gilt Burning Water with Quinte Essence.





And if it so be þat ȝe haue not þis brennynge watir redy, þanne
quenche ȝoure floreyn in þe beste whiȝt wiyn þat may be
had /
For sikirly þe philosophore seiþ, þat wiyn hath also þe propirtee
to restreyne in it þe influence and vertues of
gold /
And whanne ȝe haue do ȝoure werk, ȝe schal wite þat þe floreyn is
als good, & almoost of þe same weiȝte, as it was afore /


You may substitute for Burning Water best white wine, which also retains
the powers of gold.





þerfore vse wiyn or brennynge watir giltid, so þat ȝe may
be hool, and wexe glad, and be ȝong.
And þus ȝe haue oure heuene, and þe sunne in him fixid, to þe
conseruacioun of mannys nature and fixacioun of
oure heuene, þat is, oure quinte essence.




This gilt Water will make you well and young again.
In it you have the Sun fixed in our Heaven.





The science how ȝe schule gilde more myȝtily by brennynge
watir or wiyn þan I tauȝte you tofore, wherby þe water or þe wiyn
schal take to it myȝtily þe influence & þe vertues of fyne
gold.





‘science.’


How to gild Burning Water or Wine more thoroughly.





Take þe calx of fyn gold as it is declarid here-aftir in þis
book, and putte it in a siluer spone, and anele it at þe fier. &
þanne caste þe cals of the gold in þe brennynge watir or
in wiyn .l. times, as I tauȝte ȝou tofore wiþ þe floreyn.


Heat calcined gold in a silver spoon and put it in Burning Water or wine
50 times, as with the florin before.




[* Fol. 14b.]


and ȝe schule haue ȝoure licour by an hundrid part
bettir gilt þan ȝe had tofore wiþ þe floreyn /
Forwhi. fier worchiþ more strongly and bettere *in sotil
parties þan it doiþ in an hool plate /
And also brennynge watir or wiyn drawiþ out more myȝtily bi a
þousand part þe propirtees of gold fro smale
parties anelid, þan it doiþ fro a þicke plate /
And ȝe schal vndirstonde þat wiyn not aloonly holdiþ in it þe
propirtees of gold, but myche more þe propirtees of alle
liquibles if þei be quenchid þerinne.


Your liquor will be better gilt, as the fire and Water or wine work more
powerfully on the grains of gold than on a plate.
Wine retains the properties of all liquibles quenched in it.





and þat is a souereyn priuite: Forwhi, if ȝe quenche saturne
liquified in wiyn or in comoun watir .7. tymes, and aftirward in
þat wiyn or watir ȝe quenche mars manye tymes, þanne mars schal
take algate þe neischede and þe softnes of saturne /


If Saturn (lead) liquefied be quenched in wine, and then Mars (iron) be
quenched in it, Mars acquires the softness of Saturn.





And þe same schal venus do, & alle oþere liquibles /
or ellis, And ȝe
8
 
quenche mars in whiȝt wiyn or in comoun watir manye tymes, and
aftirward in þe same wiyn or watir ȝe caste saturne liquified
ofte tymes, þanne wiþoute doute ȝe schal fynde þat þe saturne is
maad riȝt hard /
Therfore þe propirtees of alle liquibles may be brouȝt into wiyn
or watir; but myche more myȝtily into brennynge watir good and
precious.




Again, if you quench Mars in wine and put in it Saturn liquefied, this
will be made hard.




TO MAKE FIRE WITH NO FIRE.


The science to make a fier, þat is, wiþoute cole,
withoute lyme, wiþoute liȝt, worchinge aȝens al maner
scharpnes or accioun of visible fier, riȝt as worchiþ þe
fier
of helle /




To make fire without coals, lime, light, &c.




[* Fol. 15]


And þis priuytee is so vertuous, þat þe
vertu þerof may not al be declarid. And þus it is maad.
Take Mercurie þat is sublymed with vitriol,
*& comen salt, & sał armoniac .7. or .10. tymes
sublymed /
and meynge hem togidere by euene porcioun. and grynde it
smal, and leye it abrood vpon a marbil stoon; and by nyȝte sette it
in a soft cleer eir, or ellis in a coold seler; and þere
it wole turne into watir /
And þanne gadere it togidere in to a strong vessel of glas, and
kepe it /


Mix equal parts of sublimated Mercury, Salt, and Sal Ammoniac, grind
them small, expose them to the air, and they’ll turn into water,





This water forsoþe is so strong, þat if a litil drope
þerof falle vpon ȝoure hond, anoon it wole perce it
þoruȝ-out; and in þe same maner it wole do, if it falle vpon a
plate of venus or Iubiter, into þis watir, it turneþ hem into lijknes of
peerl.


a drop of which will eat thro’ your hand, and make Venus (copper) or
Jupiter (tin) like pearl.





who so coude reparale & preparate kyndely
þis fier, wiþoute doute it wolde quenche anoon a brennynge
sijknes clepid þe fier of helle. And also it wolde heele euery
cor[os]if sijknesse.


If it could be moderated it would cure the disease Hell fire, and every
corrosive sickness.





And manye philosophoris clepiþ þis þing in her bookis ‘sal
amarus,’ al þouȝ þei teche not þe maistrie þerof /
If it be so þat þis firy watir breke þe glas, and renne
out into þe aischen, þanne gadere alle togidere þat ȝe fynde
pastid in þe aischen /
and leye it vpon a marbil stoon as afore, and it wole
turne into watir. And þis is a greet priuytee.





‘sal amarus.’
It is also called ‘Sal Amarus.’




TO CALCINE GOLD.
[* Fol. 15b.]


The science to brynge gold into calx /
Take fyn gold, and make it into smal lymayl: take a crusible wiþ a good
quantitee of Mercurie, and sette it to a litil fier so
þat it vapoure not, and putte þerinne þi lymail
of gold, and stire it weel togidere /
& aftirward *wiþinne a litil tyme ȝe schal se al þe gold
wiþinne þe Mercurie turned into erþe as sotil as
flour. þanne ȝeue it a good fier, þat þe Mercurie
arise and go his wey;



‘Science.’


To calcine gold.
Cut gold into shavings; put it into a crucible with Mercury; heat it,
and it will crumble into dust like flour.
Heat it more till the mercury goes his way;




9
 


or ellis, and ȝe wole, ȝe may distille and gadere it, puttynge
þer-vpon a lembike /
and in þe corusible ȝe schal fynde þe gold calcyned and reducid into
erþe /


or distil it, and the gold powder will be in the crucible.





And if ȝe wole not make lymayl of gold, þanne make þerof a sotil
þinne plate, as ȝe kan, and putte wiþinne þe
Mercurie al warm; and ȝe schal haue ȝoure desier /
And in þis same maner ȝe may worche wiþ siluir /


A thin plate of gold will do instead of shavings, and Silver may be
treated like gold.





Thanne take þe calx of þese two bodies, and bere hem openly wiþ ȝou;
and þer schal noman knowe what þei ben /
And if ȝe wole bere
hem more priuyly wiþoute ony knowynge, þanne meynge hem wiþ
pich melt, or wex, or ellis gumme, for þanne noman schal knowe
it what it is.

To carry these powders about, mix them with pitch, wax, or gum,





And whanne ȝe wole dissolue ony of þese calces by hem silf, putte eiþir
by him silf in a test, or ellis þe pich or þe wex in which þei
ben ynne; and anoon schal come out verry gold &
siluer as þei were tofore.




melting the mass when you want the metal.





Now I wole teche ȝou þe maistrie of departynge of gold fro siluir
whanne þei be meyngid togidere /
Forsoþe ȝe woot weel þat þer be manye werkis in þe whiche gold and
siluir be meyngid, as in giltynge of vessel & Iewellis /




How to separate gold from silver when mixed with it.




[* Fol. 16.]


þerfore whanne ȝe wole drawe þe toon fro þat oþir, putte al þat
mixture into a strong watir maad of vitriol and of sał petre. and
þe *siluyr wole be dissolued, and not þe gold: þanne ȝe haue
þat oon departid fro þe toþir /


Put the mixture into a solution of vitriol and saltpetre, and the silver
will be dissolved.





And if ȝe wole dissolue þe gold to watir, putte þanne yn þe watir
corosyue, Sał armoniac; and þat watir wiþoute doute wole dissolue
gold into watir.




Corrosive water and sal ammoniac will dissolve the gold.




TO GET THE QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF GOLD.


The science to drawe out of fyn gold vta
essencia is þis /
First ȝe schal reduce gold into calx, as I tolde ȝou tofore /
þanne take vynegre distillid, or ellis oold vryne depurid fro þe fecis, and putte it
in a uessel glasid; and þe liquor schal be in þe heiȝþe of 4. ynchis;
and þerinne caste þe calx of gold, & sette it to the
strong sunne in somer tyme, þere to abide /
and soone aftir ȝe schal se as it were a liquor of oyle ascende vp,
fletynge aboue in maner of a skyn or of a reme. gadere þat awey wiþ a sotil spone or
ellis a feþere, and putte it into a uessel of glas in þe which be
putt watir tofore. and þus gadere it manye tymes in þe day, into þe tyme
þat þer ascende nomore /



‘science.’

‘Nota.’


How to get out of gold its Quinte Essence.
Put calcined gold into distilled vinegar or purified urine; set it in a
hot sun; a film will soon rise; skim it off, collect all such in a glass
vessel till no more rise.





and aftir do vapoure awey þe watir at þe fier. And þe vta
essencia of þe
10
 
gold wole abyde byneþe. And manye philosophoris clepiþ þis quinta
essencia an oile incombustible, þat is a greet
priuytee /


Evaporate the water left; the residuum is the Quinte Essence of Gold.





And if ȝe wole fixe þis quinta essencia in
oure heuene, þat4 it may wiþoute doute restore aȝen to man þat
nature þat is lost, and reduce him aȝen into þe
vertu of þe strenkþe of ȝongþe, and also lenkþiþ his lijf into þe
laste terme of lijf set of god //


And if you fix this Quinte Essence in our heaven, it will restore man to
the strength of his youth.




[* Fol. 16b.]


Now forsoþe I haue toold ȝou þe souereynest *priuytee and
restorynge of mannys kynde, and in part greet þing þat
schulde not be schewid /
Forwhi. þis oyle, þat is to seie, quinta essencia of gold,
hath þe mooste swetnes and vertu to a-swage and putte awei þe
ache of woundis, and for to heele woundis, oolde sooris, and manye
wondirful yuelis /
Also in þe same maner ȝe may drawe out of siluir, quinte
essencie //




Now I have told this most sovereign secret, which should not be shewed.

[Nota.]
The Quinte Essence of gold is best to heal wounds.




TO GET THE QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF ANTIMONY, &C.


The science to drawe out of antymony, þat is, mercasite of leed,
þe vte essencie, is a souereyn maistrie, and a
priuytee of alle priuytees /
Take þe myn of antymony aforeseid, and make þerof al so sotil a
poudre as ȝe kan /
þanne take þe beste vynegre distillid, and putte þerinne þe
poudre of antymonye, and lete it stonde in a glas vpon a litil fier into
þe tyme þat þe vynegre be colourid reed. þanne take þat vynegre
awey, and kepe it clene, and putte aȝen þer-to of oþere vynegre
distillid, and lete it stonde vpon a soft fier til it be colourid reed.
& so do ofte tymes. and whanne ȝe haue gaderid al ȝoure
vynegre colourid, putte it þanne in a distillatorie. and first
þe vynegre wole ascende; þanne after ȝe schal se merueilis: for
ȝe schal se as it were a þousand dropis of blessid wiyn discende doun in
maner of reed dropis, as it were blood, by þe pipe of þe lymbike /
þe which licour, gadere togidere in a rotumbe /
and þanne ȝe haue a þing þat al þe tresour of þe world may not be
in comparisoun of worþines þerto /




How to get its Quinte Essence out of Antimony.

Put powdered antimony into distilled vinegar; heat it till the vinegar
is red; take away the red vinegar, and put fresh; take that away when
red. Put the red vinegar into a distiller, and 1000 drops of blessed
wine shall come down the pipe; collect this; it is an incomparable
treasure.




[* Fol. 17.]


aristotle seiþ þat it is his lede in þe book of secretis,
al þouȝ he *telle not þe name of þe antymonye aforeseid /



[Nota.]





Forsoþe þis doiþ awey ache of alle woundis, and wondirfully heeliþ. þe
vertu þerof is incorruptible & merueilous
profitable /


It cures the pain of all wounds,





it nedit to be putrified in a rotombe and seelid in fyme, and þanne it worchiþ greet
priuytees /
Forsoþe þe vta essencia of þis antymony þat is reed,
in þe which is
11
 
þe secreet of alle secretis, is swettere þan ony
hony, or sugre, or ony oþir þing.




and when fermented it works great secrets.




TO EXTRACT THE QUINTE ESSENCE FROM MAN’S BLOOD.


The science in the extraccioun of þe .55 essencie from blood, and fleisch, &
eggis /
To ȝou I seie, þat in euery elementid þing, þe .5.
essencie remayneþ incorrupte: it schal be þanne þe moost
þing of merueyle if I teche ȝou to drawe out þat fro mannys blood
reserued of Barbouris whanne þei lete blood; also fro fleisch of alle
brute beestis, and fro alle eggis, and oþere suche þingis.



‘Science.’


How to get its Quinte Essence from Man’s Blood.





for als myche as mannes blood is þe perfitist werk of kynde in
us, as to þe encrees of þat þat is lost, it is certeyn þat nature
þat .5. essence maad so perfiȝt þat, wiþoute ony
oþir greet preparacioun wiþoute þe veynes, it beriþ forþ
þat blood anoon aftir into fleisch. and þis 5 essence is so nyȝ
kynde þat [it] is moost to haue6 /


Man’s blood is the perfectest work of nature in us, and its Quinte
Essence converts blood into flesh,





Forwhy. in it is merueylous vertu of oure heuene sterrid, and to
þe cure of nature of man worchiþ moost deuyn myraclis, as wiþinne
I schal teche ȝou /


and works divine miracles of healing.





þerfore resceyue of Barbouris, of ȝong sangueyn men, or colerik men,
whanne þei be late blood, þe which vse good wynes. take þat blood
aftir þat it haþ reste, and cast awey þe watir fro it, and braie
it wiþ þe .10. part of comen salt preparate
to medicyns of men; and putte it into a uessel of glas clepid
amphora,


Get from Barbers the blood of young sanguine men; let it stand;
pour off the serum; mix the blood with a tenth of prepared salt;
put it in an amphora;




[* Fol. 17b.]


þe which, sotely seele, and putte it wiþinne þe *wombe of an
hors, preparate as tofore, and renewe þe fyme oonys in þe
wike, or more, and lete it putrifie til al þe blood be turned into
watir /
and it schal be doon at þe mooste in xxx. or xl dayes, or aftir, more or
lasse /
þanne putte it in a lembike, and distille it at a good fier /
what so euere may ascende, putte þat watir vpon þe fecis brayed,
meyngynge vpon a marbil stoon; putte it aȝen, and aftir distille
it aȝen manye tymes rehersynge /


seal that up; put it in a horse’s belly, renewing the dung weekly till
all the blood turns into water; distil that; put the outcome on the
pounded fæces, and distil over again.





And whanne ȝe haue þis noble þing of blood, þerof þe .5. beynge
drawe out /
putte aȝen þe watir in þe stillatorie of circulacioun til ȝe
brynge it to so myche swetnes & an heuenly sauour, as ȝe dide þe
brennynge watir. and þis is þe 5 beynge of blood deuyn, and miraclis
more þan man mai bileue but if he se it.




Heat the water in the distiller till it comes to a heavenly savour. This
Fifth Being works miracles hardly credible unless seen.




12
 
TO GET THE QUINTE ESSENCE OUT OF BEASTS AND THE 4 ELEMENTS.


Now wole I teche ȝou to drawe out þe .5 beynge from capouns,
hennes, and al maner fleisch of Brut beestis, and from al
maner eggis of foulis þat ben holsum and medicynable to ete for mān
kynde /
Grynde summe of þese þingis forseid, which þat ȝe wil, as strongly as ȝe
can in a morter, wiþ þe 10 part of him of sal
comen preparate to þe medicyne of
men, as I seide tofore. putte it in þe wombe of an hors til it be
turned into water. distille as it is aforeseid, and in þe stillatorie of
circulacioun þe watir þat is distillid, putte it in aȝen
til it be brouȝt to þe swete heuenly sauour and smel aforeseid /





To get the Quinte Essence out of capons, beasts, eggs, &c.
Grind some of them with a tenth part of prepared salt; put ’em into a
horse’s belly till they become water, and distil that till it’s
heaven-sweet.





The science to drawe out þe 5 beynge of euerych of þe .4
elementis, and to schewe euerych of þe forseid þing bi hem
silf; & þat is riȝt merueylous /
I wole not leue for a litil to schewe a greet secreet, how ȝe may drawe
out þe 5 beynge of ech of þe 4 elementis of al þe þing rehersid afore,
and profitably
schewe hem /


‘science.’


To draw the Fifth Being out of each of the Four Elements, and to
separate them.




[* Fol. 18.]


And þe maner ys *þis /
take þat þing putrified
and brouȝt into watir, what so euere ȝe wole, as I tauȝte ȝou
tofore; and þat þing be mannes blood brouȝt into watir, of þe which ȝe
wole drawe out þe 4 elementis /
putte þerfore þat
water, or þat blood putrified, in a stillatorie of glas, and
sette
it wiþinne a pott of watir, and ȝeue vndirneþe a fier til þe
watir
of blood be distillid by þe pipe of þe lembike into a glas clepid
amphora, riȝt clene /


Take any thing rotted and turned into water, as man’s blood; put it in a
glass distiller, and distil it over into an amphora.





And whanne no þing may more by þat fier ascende, for certeyn ȝe haue of
blood drawen out al oonly þe element of watir /
Forwhi. fier of þat bath hath no strenkþe to sublyme eyr, or fier, or
erþe.


When no more vapour rises, you have drawn out the water.





and so [take] þo þre elementis, and sette in þe same bath by .vij.
dayes þat þei be weel meyngid, & so cloos þat no þing be
distillid /


Put the other 3 elements for 7 days into the same bath,





aftir þe .vij. dayes take þe stillatorie, and putte it to þe fier of
aischen, þat is strongere þan fier of bath clepid marien; and þe watir
schal ascende in foorme of oyle schynynge as gold /


then into a coal fire, and the water shall rise as oil shining like
gold,





and aftirward þat no þing more schal ascende, ȝe haue þanne in þe
ampulle .ij. elementis, þat is to seie, watir and eyr. & oon from
anoþir ȝe schal departe in þe bath, puttynge yn aȝen wher
al-oonly þe cleer watir schal ascende /
and þe eyr schal al-oonly remayne in̅ þe botum of þe vessel in
lijknesse of oyle of gold. þe which oyle þat is gold, þe which oyle
13
 
þat is ayr /
putte it aside.


the air remaining at the bottom like oil of gold. Put these aside.





þanne þer leeueþ ȝitt fier wiþ erþe. to departe fier from
erþe, putte þe element of watir, þat is to seye .iiij ℔ of watir, vpon j
℔ of
mater /
and putte by .vij. daies to encorpere wel as tofore in þe bath of
marien̅ /


To separate fire from the earth, put 4 lbs. of water on 1 lb. of earth;
place it in the Marian bath for 7 days;




[* Fol. 18b.]


Aftirward putte it to þe fier of flawme riȝt strong, and þe reed
water schal ascende. þe which gadere togidere as longe as ony
*þing ascendiþ. and to ȝou schal remayne an erþe riȝt blak in þe botum.
þe which gadere togidere aside /


then in hot flames; red water shall ascend and black earth fall.





þanne þe redeste watir ȝe schal take. forwhy. þer be .ij.
elementis, þat is to seie, þe element of watir and fier.
þanne yn þe stillatorie, to þe fier of baþ, cleer watir schal
asende. and in þe botum schal remayne þe reed watir, þat is, þe
element of fier.


Put the red water into the distiller; pure water shall rise; red water,
or fire, shall remain;





and so ȝe haue now first oon oyle, þat is, ayer o side, and watir, and
fier, and erþe. and note ȝe weel þat þerfore þe element of
watir is putt aȝen to drawe out from erþe fier and eyr, for þei
wole not ascende, but þoruȝ þe help of element of watir.


so you have the 4 Elements separate.





brynge aȝen euerych into 5 beynge wiþ þe vessel of
circulacioun as tofore /
or ellis rectifie, makynge oon ascende .7 tymes bi an oþir /
but first ȝe moste þe riȝt blak erþe of oon hide7 nature, in þe furneys of glas mon8, or ellis reuerberacioun, xxj. dayes
calcyne /


Distil each into its Quinte Essence, or rectify it, and





And for a cause I speke to ȝou nomore of this science. but ioie ȝe, and
thanke oure glorious lord god of þese þingis þat ȝe haue had.




thank our glorious God for this bit of knowledge.




HOW TO FIX OTHER THINGS IN OUR QUINTE ESSENCE.


The science to fixe alle erþely þingis in nostra 5ta
essencia, þat is to seie, oure heuene, þat by her
influence þei may ȝeue þerto þer propertees and her hid
vertues /
oure glorious god haþ ȝeue sich a uertu to oure quinta
essence, þat it may drawe out of euery matier of fruyȝt /
tree / rote / flour, herbe /
fleisch, seed & spice /
And euery medicynable þing, alle þe vertues,
propirtees, and naturis, þe whiche god made in hem; and
þat wiþinne .iij. houris.






To fix all earthly things in our Quinte Essence.
God has given it the power of drawing all the virtues out of every thing
in 3 hours.




OUR QUINTE ESSENCE IMPROVES EVERYTHING 100 FOLD.

[* Fol. 19.]


Now I haue schewid ȝou a souereyn priuytee, how þat ȝe may
wiþ oure heuene drawe out euery 5 essencia from alle
þingis aforeseid /
þerfore alle necessarie þingis to euery syrup putte yn
oure 5 essencie, & wiþinne .iij. houris þat
watir schal be sich a sirup, vndirstonde wel, bettir by an hundrid
part, by
14
 
cause of oure 5 essencie, þan it *schulde be wiþoute it /


Put therefore every thing necessary for any syrup into our Quinte
Essence, and in 3 hours it shall be 100 times better than before.





And so I seie of medicyns comfortatyues, digestyues, laxatyues,
restriktyues, and alle oþere; forwhy. if ȝe putte seedis
or flouris, fruyȝtis, leeues, spicis, coold, hoot, sweet, sour, moist,
do þei good or yuel, into oure 5 essencie,
forsoþe sich 5 essence ȝe schulen haue þerfore.


Whatever medicines are put into our Quinte Essence,





oure 5 essencie is þe instrument of alle vertues of
þing transmutable if þei be putt in it, encreessynge an
hundrid foold her worchingis //


it increases their power a hundred fold.











Explicit pars prima tractatus quinte
essencie:


End of Part I.





BOOK II.



15
 
TO MAKE OLD MEN YOUNG, AND DYING ONES WELL.


Here bigynneth the secunde book of medicyns /
The first medicyn is to reduce an oold feble euangelik man to þe firste
strenkþe of ȝongþe /
Also to restore aȝen his nature þat is lost, and to lenkþe
his lijf in greet gladnesse and perfiȝte heele
vnto þe laste teerme of his lijf þat is sett of god /




To restore an old evangelic man to the strength of his youth.





ȝe schal take oure 5ta essencie aforeseid, þat
is to seye, mannys heuene, and þerinne putte a litil
quantite of 5 essencia of gold and of peerl.
and þe oolde feble man schal vse þis deuyn drynk at morn and at euen,
ech tyme a walnote-schelle fulle /


Give him our Quinte Essence with some of that ‘1a.
Me.’ of Gold and Pearl, a walnut-shell full at morn and eve.





and wiþinne a fewe dayes he schal so hool9 þat he schal fele him silf of þe statt and þe strenkþe of
xl ȝeer; and he schal haue greet ioie þat he is come to þe statt of
ȝongþe. And whanne his ȝongþe is recouerid, and his nature restorid, and
heelþe had, it is nedeful þat litil and
seelde he vse 5 essence /
Also it is nedeful þat he vse ofte good wiyn at his mete and at þe
soper, in þe which be fixid þe 5. essence of gold, as I tauȝte ȝou
tofore.




In a few days he shall feel only 40 years old.
Then let him take little of our Quinte Essence, only that of Gold in
good wine at dinner and supper.




[* Fol. 19b.]


The secunde *medicyn is to heele a man, and make hym
lyue, þat is almoost consumed in nature, and so nyȝ deed þat he
is forsake of lechis.
but if it be þe laste teerme of his lijf sett of god, ȝe schal ȝeue
him oure quinte essence of gold wiþ a litil
quantite of watir of celendoyn ȝdrawe, and meynge it wiþ þe oþere
þingis aforeseid /
and anoon as þe sike hath resceyued it into his stomak, it ȝeueþ to þe
herte influence of naturel heete and of lijf.
and þanne ȝe schal se him rise vp and speke, and wondirfully be
comfortid and strenkþid þerby //



‘2a. Me.’


To cure a man given up by his doctors.
Give him Quinte Essence of Gold with celandine water,

‘Aqua celidoyn.’
and he shall rise up and speak.





þanne comforte him wiþ ministracioun of oure
quinte essencie afore seid, and he schal be al hool /
but if it be so þat god wole algatis þat he schal die /
And I seie to ȝou truly, þat þis is þe hiȝeste maistrie
þat may be in transmutacioun of kynde; for riȝt fewe
lechis now lyuynge knowe þis priuytee.




Then comfort him with our Quinte Essence, and he shall be cured, unless
God wills he shall die.
Few doctors now know this highest secret.




16
 
HOW TO CURE LEPROSY AND PALSY.


The þridde medicyn is to cure þe lepre þat is causid of
corrupcioun and putrifaccioun of ony of þe principal humouris of
man; but not þe lepre þat comeþ to man of kynde of þe fadir and
of þe modir leprous,—for it is callid morbus
hereditus,—ne þe lepre þat is sent of god by his plage, but
þat
þat is causid oonly of rotun humouris /



‘3a. Me.’


To cure the Leprosy that is caused by rotten humours.





take oure 5 essence aforeseid, wiþ þe quinte
essence of goold and peerl, a litil quantite at oonys, and
vse it in maner as I seide afore /
and wiþinne a fewe daies he schal be partily hool
þerof.
and if ȝe haue non preparate redy oure 5
essence, þanne take in þe stide þerof fyn
brennynge watir /
but þat oþer is bettere.




Use our Quinte Essence, with those of Gold and Pearl;
(or Burning Water, if you have no Quinte Essence.)




[* Fol. 20.]


Also, drawe a water of þe fruyȝt of strawbery or mulbery tree,
whanne it is ripe, and waische þe lepre þerwiþ. þis watir is of
so greet vertu; for a souereyn maistir took it a leprous
*womman, þat wiþ þe waischinge oonly of þis watir,
withynne schort tyme was maad al hool /
but sikirly þe vertu þerof is myche worth if it be meyngid
with oure 5 essence, or ellis brennyng
watir; and þanne it schal be no nede to vse in þis perilous cure,
venemys, as summe lechis doon.




Wash the leper with strawberry or mulberry water; this is of great
virtue, but is much encreased by our Quinte Essence.





The 4 medicyn is to cure palsie vniuersel. Forsoþe alle
philosophoris seyn þat þe palesye vniuersel comeþ of
haboundaunce of viscous humouris closynge þe metis of vertu
animale, sensityue, and motyue. And þerfore it is
necessarie þat þo þingis þat schal cure þis sijknes be temperate,
hoot, and moist, and a litil attractyue, and to þe synous
confortatyue /


4a. Me.


To cure Palsy, which comes from viscous humours closing the passages of
motive power.





Therfore, blessid be god, makere of kynde, þat ordeynede for þe
man paralitike oure 5 essence aforseid,
þat souereynly to him comfortynge, restorynge, and
temperatly worchynge /


Blessed be God, our Quinte Essence will restore the paralitic.





þerfore fixe þerinne þe 5 essence of
þo laxatyues þat purgen flewme &
viscous humouris, as a litil of euforbie, or turbit, or sambucy. & þanne wiþoute doute,
if god wole, þe paralitik man schal be hool wiþ comfortynge and
restorynge of kynde, if ȝe make him
a stewe hoot and moist with herbis, þat is to seye, eerbe yue, &
sauge, þat haue an heuenly strenkþe to comforte þe joynctis, & þe
senewis, and þe vertu motyue.


Fix in it the Quinte Essence of euphorbium and the like; and, if God
will, the palsied man shall be whole, if you make him a stew of ivy and
sage.

‘sawe’

‘Nota / yue / sauge.’





and if ȝe haue not redi preparate oure 5
essence, þanne take fyn brennynge watir til it
17
 
be redy, and lete þe pacient drynke þerof a litil in fyn wiyn.
and also he schal waische al his body and his extremytees wiþ brennynge
watir ofte tymes. and lete him vse þis a good while, & he schal be
hool. /




Failing Quinte Essence, let him drink Burning Water in fine wine, and
wash all over with burning water.




[* Fol. 20b.]
TO CURE CONSUMPTION AND DRIVE AWAY DEVILS.


*The .5 medicyn for a man þat is almoost al consumed,
& waastid in al his body, and riȝt leene, as þat man
þat hath þe tisik & þe etik /
Forsoþe þe verry cure to heele him is oure 5
essence /
Forwhi. it comfortiþ þe feble nature; and þe nature þat is lost it
restoriþ, & so restorid it preserueþ /



‘5. Me.’


To fatten lean and consumptive men.





And þerfore if ȝe wol restore þe fleisch of a leene mannys body
almoost consumed awey, drawe þanne a watir of celidoyne, and take
þerof a litil quantite, and meynge wiþ oure 5
essence if ȝe haue it redy, or brennynge watir in stide
þerof,
and ȝeue it him to drinke; and wiþinne fewe dayes
he schal be wondirfully restorid and fat.




Mix with our Quinte Essence a little celandine water;

‘Celidoyne.’
give it the patient, and he shall soon be wonderfully fat.





The .6. medicyn for passiouns of frenesie, foly,
ymagynaciouns and noyous vexaciouns of
deuelis, and also for þe goute als weel hoot as coold.
certeyn experience techiþ þat colerik men ȝeueþ to
summe ymagynaciouns; and sangueyn men
ben ocupied aboute summe oþere
ymagynaciouns; & ȝitt flewmatik men aboute
oþere /
but þo men þat habounde in blak coler, þat is, malencoly, ben
occupied a þousand part wiþ mo þouȝtis þan ben men
of ony oþer complexioun /



‘.6. Me.’


To cure Frensy, Gout, and troubles from Devils.

‘colerike.’
‘Sangueyn.’
‘Fleumatyke.’
‘blake coler.’
‘malencoly.’





Forwhi. þat humour of blak coler is so noyous, þat if it
a-bounde and a-sende vp to þe heed, it troubliþ alle þe myȝtis of þe
brayn, engendrynge noyous ymagynaciouns, bryngynge yn horrible
þouȝtis boþe wakynge and slepinge; and siche maner of men ben
born vndir þe constillacioun of saturne, the wickide planete /



Dark melancholy men are troubled more with anxieties than any others,

‘Nota sequentia.’
being born under ‘Saturne, a wykyd planete.’




TO CURE MELANCHOLY AND DRIVE OUT TROUBLES FROM DEVILS.
[* Fol. 21.]


Forsoþe, to siche men deuelis wole gladly appere, &
minister to hem10 her priuy temptaciouns
wiþinne þe cours of her þouȝtis;


Devils gladly appear to them and tempt them,





and þese men þus *turmentid wiþ þe passiouns of malencoly
comounly speke wiþ hem, stryue and dispute wiþ hem silf whanne
þei be a-loone, þat ofte tymes oþere folk may heere
it /
These maner of men þat ben þus turmentid, as weel by
passioun of malencoly as of deuelis, ofte tymes falle in dispeir, and at
þe laste sle hem silf /


so that they often fall into despair and kill themselves.





þe perfiȝt cure of alle þese is oure 5 essencie auri
et
18
 
perelarum, or ellis brennynge watir in stide þerof,
in þe whiche ȝe fixe gold as it is aforeseid, wherinne be putt a
litil of sen̅ē or watir of f[u]miter, or poudre of lapis lasuly, or ellis medullam ebuli, and vse it
discreetly. forwhy. not al oonly oure quinte
essence auri et perelarum heelith
þese disesis. /


The cure is our Quinte Essence of Gold and Pearls, with a little senna
or lapis lazuli.





but also brennynge watir in þe which gold is fixid, heeliþ hem, wiþ a
litil of þo þingis þat purgen and casten out blak coler
superflue, & heliþ þe splene.




Burning Water, with a purge, will also cure these diseases.





Forsoþe þese medicyns puttiþ awey wickid þouȝtis and an heuy herte
malencolious; þei gladith and clense þe brayn and alle hise myȝtis, and
brynge yn gladnes and merye þouȝtis. þei putte awey also þe craft of þe
feendis temptaciouns, and ymagynaciouns of dispeir. þei
distroie, & make a man to forȝete almaner of yueles, and naturaly
bryngiþ him aȝen to resonable witt.


These medicines put away wicked thoughts, and bring in merry ones; they
dispel devils’ temptations and despair, and bring a man to reason.





and for as myche as saturne þe planete naturaly ys coold and drye, and
is enemye to al kynde /
Forwhy, euery snow, euery hayl, euery tempest, & also þe humour of
malencoly comeþ of him.
& he haþ his influence vpon derk leed, &



‘Saturne. γ.’
Saturn is an enemy to all creatures, and has power over foul solitary
places, as Vitas Patrum says.




[* Fol. 21b.]


vpon derk *placis vnder þe erf11, foule and stynkynge, and derke wodis, and vpon
foule, horrible, solitarie placis, as it is preued in vitas
patrum, þat is to seye, in lyues & colaciouns of
fadris /






And also þe moone, naturely coold and moist, haþ his influence vpon þe
nyȝt, and vpon myche moisture, and vpon þe placis whanne 4. weyes
metiþ togidere. forsoþe in alle siche placis þei wole a-bide and schewe
hem to her foloweris /


The Moon too is full of bane.





but forsoþe þo þingis þat ben of þe nature of Iubiter and of sol, goode
planetis, arne displesynge to him, and contrarie, and naturaly
deuelis fle awei fro hem, for þei haue greet abhominacioun
of þer vertuous influence /


‘Jubiter and Sol | .B.’
Jupiter and Sol, on the other hand, make devils flee,





þerfore it schewiþ weel þat þo þingis þat ben in þis
world, summe þer ben þat bitokene þe glorious yoie of heuene, and
summe þing þat figure þe derknesse of euerlastynge peynes of
helle /
Forsoþe þe sunne and iubiter, goode planetis, & gold, pure
metal, and alle pure þingis þat gladen a man, figurynge
by resoun þe ioie of heuene /


and betoken the joy of heaven,





and blak Saturne, and þe spotty moone, figure & bitokene þe
condicioun of helle /


as Saturn and the Moon do hell.




19
 
TO CURE THE GOUT AND ITCH, AND KILL LICE.


and siþ þat deuelis be dampned, & ful of wreche of helle,
þerfore þei hate þe clennesse & þe ioie of oure lord god & of
hise seyntis /
also þei haten þe sunne and his cleernes, and pure þingis
þat maken a man glad. and naturaly it plesiþ hem to dwelle
in derk, & in blak, orrible, stynkynge placis, in heuynesse, wreche,
& malencoly, & in þo þingis þat
pretende þe condicioun of helle /


Devils hate the joys of God and the brightness of the sun; they delight
in stinking places, and melancholy and hell-like things.




[* Fol. 22.]


And siþ oure 5. essence aforeseid is so
heuenly a þing, & by sotil craft *brouȝt to so myche
swetnes, it is so souereyn a medicyn þat it may
weel be lijkned to þe ioie of paradice. forwhi, it makiþ a man
liȝt, iocunde, glad, and merie, & puttiþ awey heuynesse12, angre, melencoly, &
wraþþe, þe whiche þat deuelis loue /
et ideo nostra 5 essencia digne vocatur
celum humanum /



But our Quinte Essence is heavenly, like the joy of Paradise, and
drives away anger and all that devils love, so that it is fitly called
‘Man’s Heaven.’





Also if a man be traueylid wiþ a feend, and may not be delyuerid fro
him, lete him drinke a litil quantite of oure 5
essence, wiþ 5 essence of gold & peerl,
and wiþ an eerbe callid ypericon, i.[e.] fuga demonum, and þe seed
þerof grounden & aftirward distillid, & þe watir
þerof a litil quantite medlid wiþ þe oþere 5tis
essenciis; and anoon þe deuel wole fle awey fro him
& fro his hous.




To deliver a man from a devil,—give him some of our Quinte Essence
with that of gold and pearl, and St. John’s Wort water: at once the
devil will flee away.

‘fuga demonum’





Also for þe goute, hoot or cold, þe pacient schal drynke oure 5.
essence wiþ a litil quantite at oonys of þe
letuarie de
succo rosarum.
and lete him vse þis letuarie a litil at oonys ech oþere
day, til superflue humouris be purgid /
but he schal vse euery day a litil of oure 5.
essence with 5 essence of gold
& peerle; & wiþinne a fewe dayes þe pacient schal be
hool. //






To cure the Gout.
Take a little Quinte Essence and Rose-juice electuary, and use daily our
Quinte Essence with that of Gold and Pearl.





The .7. medicyn, for to heele ycche, & for to distrie lies13 þat ben engendrid
of corrupt humouris. take oure 5 essence bi
him silf a-loone, and vse to drynke þerof a litil quantite
at oonys /
and take also a litil quantite of Mer[curie?].
& mortifie it wiþ fastynge spotil, & medle it wiþ a good
quantite
20
 
of poudre of stafi-sagre, & þanne put it in to a greet
quantite of brennynge water,



‘.7. Me.’


To cure the Itch and destroy Lice.
Drink Quinte Essence.
Mix Mercury with spittle, Stavesacre and Burning Water.




[* Fol. 22b.]


& þanne waische al his body, or ellis þe heed where þe icche &
þe lies ben. & vse þis medicyn .2. or 3. & þe sijk *man schal be
hool.




Wash the body or head where the itch and lice are.




TO CURE QUARTAN FEVER.


The .8. medicyn for to cure the quarteyn and alle þe passiouns þat comeþ of
malencoly in mannys body; and þe maistrie to purge
malencoly.



‘.8ua. Me.’

‘feuer quartene.’





and ȝe schal vndirstonde þat þe quarteyn is gendrid of myche
haboundaunce of malencolye þat is corrumpid
withynne þe body. and for þis humour is erþely,
coold, & drie, of þe nature of slowe saturne, þerfore þe accesse of
þis sijknes ben slowe, and it duriþ comounly yn a man a ȝeer or
more, and it puttiþ fro him gladnesse, & bryngiþ yn heuynes
more þan oþere feueris do /




To cure Quartan Fever.

‘ye quarten is ingendyrd of Malyncoly.’
The Quartan arises from too much black choler, and lasts a year or more.






If ȝe wole heele þis sijknes in schort tyme, lete þe pacient vse to
drynke oon14 5
essence, and he schal
be al hool hastily /
forwhi; it consumeþ þe corrupt superflue humouris, & reducit
nature to equalite, and bryngiþ yn gladnesse, & chasiþ a-wey
heuynes & malencolie.


To cure it soon, drink our Quinte Essence;





and if it so be þat ȝe haue nouȝt oure 5
essence /
þanne take j ℔
of þe beste brennynge watir, and þerinne putte
medullam ebuli, and namely þe white, if ȝe may may haue it /
of þis watir ȝeue to þe pacient, morowe and euen, a
walnot-schelle ful at oonys. and he schal be al hool /


if you have it not, put pith of white dwarf elder in Burning Water, and
take a walnut-shell full morning and evening.





or ellis þus: take what þing ȝe wole þat purgiþ
malencolye, and putte a litil þerof into brennynge watir, &
vse þat laxatif maad into smale pelotis, wijsly resceyuyng
riȝt a litil at oonys, as oon litil pelot, and preue þerby how it
worchiþ, þanne anoþer tyme .ij. at oonys, if it be
nede /
so þat þe mater be a litil digestid and a litil egestid. for bettere it
is to worche a litil & a litil at oonys, þan sodeynly greue þe
nature. 

Or, take whatever purges black choler, put it into Burning Water; make
small pellets of it, and take one, and then two, gradually.




[* Fol. 23.]


forwhi, two litil pelotis laxatif meyngid wiþ brennynge
watir *wole worche more myȝtily þan .8. pelotis wole do bi hem
silf /






Also philosophoris seyn þat a tooþ drawe out from a quyk
beest, born vpon a man, delyueriþ fro þe quarteyn /
Also þei seyn þat if þe yuis of þe eerbe þat is callid morsus galline
rubri be putt in hise nose-þrillis whanne he bigynneth to suffre
þe accesse of þe quarteyn, he schal be hool, wiþ þe grace
of god.





‘Nota for ye quartene.’
It is said that a tooth from a live beast heals the Quartan, and the
juice of Hen-bit or Chickweed put in a man’s nostrils.




21
 
TO CURE CONTINUAL, TERTIAN AND DAILY FEVERS.


The medicyn to heele þe feuere contynuele. alle
philosophoris seyn þat þe feuere contynuele is
gendrid of putrifaccioun of blood and of corrupcieun of
humouris in it /
þerfore þe cure þerof is to purge blood, and to
putte awey þe corrupcioun of it, & þe humoris vneuene to make euene,
þe nature lost to restore, and so restorid to kepe /



‘9a. Me.’


To cure continual Fever.
It arises from putrefaction of blood and corruptions of humours.





Forsoþe alle þese þingis worcheþ oure quinte
essence; and þerfore it curiþ perfiȝtly þe
feuere contynuele /
and þouȝ brennynge watir caste out fro blood watry humouris and
corrupt, ȝitt take it nouȝt in þis cure /
forwhi; þouȝ brennynge watir be .7. tymes distillid, ȝitt it is
[not] fully depurid fro his brennynge heete, & þe .4.
elementis /
but siþ oure 5. essence is not hoot, ne moist, coold, ne
drie, as ben þe 4. elementis /


Our Quinte Essence cures this, (tho’ Burning Water does not,)





þerfore it heeliþ perfiȝtly þe contynuel feuere;
namely wiþ commixtioun of þe 5 essence of gold
& peerle /
and if ȝe wole strenkþe ȝoure medicyn, þanne putte yn oure 5.
essence a litil quantite of pulpa cassie fistule /
or ellis þe iuys of þe eerbe mercuriale.


if mixed with Quinte Essence of Gold and Pearl,
and a little Cassia or Herb Mercury.




[* Fol. 23b.]


& if it so be þat oþere humouris habounde to myche
with blood, þanne take þo laxatyues þat kyndely wole
*purge hem, as comoun bookis of fisik declareþ.








The 10. medicyn to cure þe feuere tercian, þe which is causid of putrifaccioun, or
reed
coler to myche haboundynge /
to cure þees sijknes, tak oure 5 essence, or ellis fyn
brennynge watir,—but þe firste is bettere,—and putte
þerinne a litil of rubarbe or of summe oþer
laxatiue þat purgiþ reed coler, and
a greet quantite of watir of endyue; and vse þis medicyn at
morowe & euen. and þe pacient schal be hool wiþoute doute.





‘10. Me.’

‘feuer tercyane.’


To cure Tertian Fever.
Take Quinte Essence, with Rhubarb and Endive water, morn and eve.

‘water of endyue.’





The 11. medicyn is for to heele þe feuere cotidian, þe which is
causid of putrifaccioun of flewme to haboundynge /
and siþ flewme is coold and moist. oure 5 essence (and in
his absence take good brennynge watir.) haþ strenkþe and vertu to
consume þe rotun watery inordinat, and to myche coold
humidite /



‘.11. Me.’

‘feuer cotydyan.’


To cure Daily Fever.





þerfore take oure 5 essence or brennynge watir, and putte
þerinne a litil of euforbij, turbit, or sambuci, or sum oþir þing
þat purgiþ flewme; and vse it morowe and eue, & þe pacient schal be
hool.




Take our Quinte Essence, and a little Euphorbium, &c.




22
 
TO CURE AGUE FEVER, LUNACY, AND CRAMP.


The .12. medicyn for to cure þe feuere agu, and þe lunatik man and
womman /
discreet maistris seyn, þat þe feuere
agu comounly
is causid of a uyolent reed coler adust, and of blood adust, and of blak
coler adust; and sumtyme of oon of
þese adust, and sumtyme of two togidere, and sumtyme of .3.
togidere /



‘.12. Me.’


To cure Ague Fever and Lunacy.

‘lunatyke persons.’
This fever comes of choler inflamed,





and þerfore þe feuere agu is þe posityue degree, and in þe
superlatyue degree, comparatif gree &
superlatif gree /
For þe feuere agu haþ comounly alienacioun of witt, &
schewynge of þingis of fantasy /


and is accompanied by lightheadedness.




[* Fol. 24.]


And ȝe schal knowe weel whiche ben þe humouris adust þat causen þe
feuere, be þese *tokenes /
Forwhi, if þe pacient seiþ þat he seeþ blak þingis, þanne
blak coler, þat is, malencolie, is adust / & if he se þingis of
gold / reed coler is adust / if reed þingis, and
schewynge of bloodt þanne blood is adust / And if he seiþ þat he
seeþ alle þese .iij, þingis, þanne alle þe humouris ben adust /
For as myche as brennynge watir ascendiþ to þe heed, and gladly wole a
man drynke /



‘Nota bene.’

‘Signa.’
As the patient sees black, gold, or red things, so the different humours
are inflamed.





And siþ þat feuere agu regneþ in þe regioun of þe
heed /
þe philosophoris counceilis þat þe pacient schal not resceyue it in þis
sijknes /


Burning Water should not be taken,





but it is nedeful þat he take oure 5 essence of gold and
of peerl, meynging þe 6 part of 5 essence of
watir of rose, violet, borage, and letuse15 /
and þanne ȝe schulen haue an heuenly medicyn to cure perfiȝtly
þis sijknesse.




but Quinte Essence of Gold and Pearl should, with that of Rose water,
Violet, &c.





For to cure þe frenesye and woodnes, or ellis at þe leeste to swage it /
take a greet quantite of popilion, and þe beste
vynegre þat ȝe may haue, and a good quantite of rewe domestik,
weel brayed, and meyngid wiþ þese forseid þingis;



‘for ye frenesye & wodnesse.’


To cure or assuage Frenzy and Madness.





and biclippe þe heed and þe feet of þe pacient with þis
medicyn; and sum þerof putte to his nose-þrillis. þis medicyn anoon
puttiþ awey þe frenesye & þe schewynge of fantasies /
it curiþ also wode men & lunatike men. and it restoriþ
aȝen witt and discrecioun, & makiþ al hool and weel at eese.




Wrap the head and feet in, and smell at, Popilion (with Vinegar mixed),
and Rue.




[* Fol. 24b.]


The .13. medicyn is to put a-wey þe craumpe fro a man. for as
myche as wise men seyn þat þe craumpe cometh of þe
hurtynge & þe febilnes of þe senewis, as it schewiþ sumtyme yn
medicyns maad of elebore, þer is no þing þat puttiþ awey
þe
23
 
craumpe as doiþ oure 5 essence aforeseid, or ellis
*brennynge watir in stede of it.





‘13a. Me.’


To cure Cramp.
Use our Quinte Essence or Burning Water.




TO CURE POISON AND COWARDICE.


The .14. medicyn, to caste out venym fro mannys body /
take oure 5 essence, and putte þerine
fleisch of a cok, neysch soden & sotilly brayed, note kirnelis, fyn
triacle,
radisch,
& garleek smal brayed, and oþere þingis þat ben goode
to caste out venym, as comoun bookis of fisik declariþ /
And also, to comforte þe herte, putte yn oure foreseid 5.
essence, þe 5. essence of gold and of peerl.
and he schal be delyuerid þerof & be hool.





‘14a. Me.’


To cast poison out of a man’s body.
Take our Quinte Essence, with cock’s flesh, nut-kernels, &c., and
Quinte Essence of Gold and Pearls.





The .15. medicyn, to make a man þat is a coward, hardy
and strong, and putte a-wey almaner of cowardise and drede /
I seye ȝou forsoþe þat no þing may telle alle þe
myraclis vertues þat god haþ maad in oure 5
essence, and not al oonly in him, but also in to his
modir, þat is to seye, fyn brennynge watir.



‘15a. Me.’


To make a Coward bold and strong.





for to cure þis sijknesse, take a litil quantite of oure 5
essence, & putte þerto double so myche of brennynge
watir, and a litil quantite of þe iuys of eerbe pione and of
saffron distillid togidere, and a litil of 5 essence of
gold and of peerl; and ȝeue it him to drinke. and aftir sodeynly, as it
were by myracle, þe coward man schal lese al maner drede and feyntnes of
herte, and he schal recouere strenkþe þat ys lost by drede, and
take to him hardynesse, and he schal dispise deeþ; he schal drede no
perelis, and passyngly he schal be maad hardy. þis is trewe, for it haþ
ofte tymes by oolde philosophoris [bene] preued /


Give him our Quinte Essence with twice as much Burning Water, and a
little Peony juice and saffron, and Quinte Essence of Gold and Pearl.
The coward shall lose all faintness of heart, despise death, and dread
no perils.




[* Fol. 25.]


þerfore it were a greet wisdom þat cristen princis, in
bateilis aȝen heþene men, hadde wiþ hem in tonnes brennynge
watir, þat þei myȝt take to euery fiȝtynge man half a riȝt
litil cuppe ful þerof to drynke in þe bigynnynge of þe batel.
& þis priuyte owith to be hid from alle enemyes of þe
chirche; and also
*princis and lordis ministringe þese þingis schulde
not telle what it is.




Therefore Christian Princes should have tuns of Burning Water, and give
every fighting man a cup before battle with the heathen.




TO CURE PESTILENTIAL FEVER AND PLAGUES.


The .16. medicyn aȝens þe feuere pestilenciale, and
þe maistrie to cure it. forsoþe holy scripture seiþ þat summe
tymes oure lord god sendiþ pestilence to sle summe maner of
peple, as it is seid deutronomium 28 in þis maner “Si
24
 
audire nolueris16 vocem domini dei tui, ut custodias et
facias omnia mandata eius, veniant super te
omnes maledicciones; iste maledictus eris in ciuitate
&c.” et infra; “ad-iungat tibi
pestilenciam donec consumat te de terra, percuciat
te dominus egestate, febre, et frigore, ardore et
estu, et aere corrupto ac rubigine, et
persequatur donec pereas” hec ibidem;
et infra “percuciat te dominus
vlcere egipti, et partem corporis per
quam stercora egerantur. scabie quoque,
et prurigine, ita ut curari nequeas; percuciat te
dominus necessitate ac furore mentis” // 


‘16a. Me.’


To cure Pestilential Fever (when not sent as a punishment by
God).
God says in Deuteronomy xxviii. that if men will not hear His voice and
obey His commandments, pestilences shall come on them.





Therfore a gret fool were he þat wolde presume to cure þese
plagis of pestilence þat ben vncurable, þat ben sent of god to
ponysche synne // Also ȝe schal vndirstonde þat men
may die in .iij. maners. in oon maner by naturel deeþ, in þe teerme
þat is sett of god /
In anoþir maner bi violent deeþ, and also in þe .iij. maner occasionaly
wiþinne þe teerme þat is sett of god; as þo men
þat to myche replecioun, or to greet abstynence or by
disperacioun, or ellis by necligence, sle him
silf /


These plagues a man would be a great fool to presume to cure,





but sikirly alle oþere maner of feueris pestilence þat god
suffriþ to come to mankynde by
perilous influence of yuele planetis, by þe grace of god
& good gouernaunce may be curid partialy
wiþ oure 5. essence.


but all other pestilences from evil planets may be cured by our Quinte
Essence with Aloes, Euphorbium, &c.,




[* Fol. 25b.]


and þerinne putte a litil of aloes epatik & euforbij,
& a litil of ierapigra galieni & of 5 essence, of
þe rote of lilie and also of gold & peerle, capilli veneris
*and ysope; for þese þingis ben nedeful to siche feueris
& apostemes /



‘Nota bene.’





it is nedeful also þat wiþ þese þingis þer be sich a
quinta essencia laxatyue þat wole purge þe
superflue humouris þat abounde; and þat þe pacient so myche
resceyue in a natural day þerof þat he may go weel oonys to sege;
and so lete him vse þis laxatif .3. in þe woke;


and a laxative Quinte Essence that will send the patient to stool once a
day.





But be weel war þat he take wiþ oure quinta
essencia but riȝt a litil quantite of þe laxatif at oonys,
as I tolde ȝou
tofore, for peril þat miȝte bifalle.



‘Caueas.’





& euery day take he by þe morowe an eye-schelle ful of good
brennynge watir, and þe corrupt eyr schal not noye him; &
also vse in þe dayes, two or þre smale pelotis pestilenciales in oure 5
essencia, or in brennynge watir; & al þe hous of þe pacient
schal be encensid
25
 
strongly .iij in þe day wiþ frank-encense, mirre, & rosyn,
terbentyn & rewe.


He must also take every morning an egg-shell-full of Burning Water, and
2 or 3 pestilence pills in our Quinte Essence, and smoke his house with
frankincense, &c.




MAY THIS BOOK...


and þis is perfiȝt cure for þe feuere pestilence /
And þus ȝe may, wiþ þis 5 essencijs, cure alle þese
sijknesses aforeseid, and manye oþere, as it were by
myracle, if ȝe worche disc[r]eetly as I haue toold ȝou tofore /






Now here I make an eende of þis tretis þat is clepid þe mooste & þe
souereyneste secrete of alle secretis, and a passynge tresour
þat may nouȝt fayle //


Here is an end of this most sovereign of all secrets.





O quantum malum foret, si hic liber perueniret ad
manus hominum mundanorum, ad noticiam
tirannorum, et ad seruicium
reproborum! quia, sicut sancti
per hunc librum poterunt continuare opera
vite christiani diucius et vehemencius, ita
et reprobi possent peruerso vsi
diucius perseuerare in malo. ego autem,
quantum in me est, propter solos
sanctos librum hunc constituo, et
ipsum custod[iæ] ihesu Christi commendo nunc
et in eternum //=//



What ills will befall if it gets into tyrants’ and reprobates’ hands and
prolongs their life in evil. I will keep it for holy men alone; and I
commend it to Christ’s keeping now and ever.











Explicit librum de maximis secretis essencie quinte &c.





FOOTNOTES

1.
practise, MS. Harl.

Printed as a sidenote in the original text.


2.
? MS. meant for ‘man.’


3.
MS. ‘siff.’


4.
then, MS. Harl.

Printed as sidenote.


5.
5 for fifth, or quinte.


6.
MS. Harl. reads ‘and this fifte beinge so nighe kinde it is most
to haue.’


7.
of vnkinde natuer. Harl. 853.


8.
of glasse made. Harl. 853.


9.
? ‘be so hool.’ Or is hool a verb, become whole, recover?


10.
MS. hom

Printed as sidenote.


11.
Erf = erþe.


12.
houynesse MS.


13.
“A lous is a worme with manye fete, & it
commeth
out of the filthi and onclene skynne, & oftentymes for faute
of atendaunce they come out of the flesshe through the skynne or
swet holes.
To withdryue them /
The best is for to wasshe the oftentimes,
and to chaunge oftentymes clene lynen.”—The noble lyfe and
nature of man, Of bestes, serpentys, fowles, and fisshes yt
be
moste knowen. Capitulo. C. xix.


14.
? our

Printed as sidenote.


15.
in margin, ‘Rose /
violett /
Borage /
lutuse /’

Printed in the space at the end of its paragraph
(page image): may have been
intended for a sidenote.


16.
MS. volueris.


26
 


THE SPHERES AND PLANETS

[leaf 26]

¶ Philosofirs puttyn 9 speris vndirewritten; but Diuinis puttin
þe tenþe spere, where is heuyn empire, in þe whiche,
angelis & sowlis1 of seyntis seruen god; in þe whiche is
crist, in þe same forme that he walkid in erþe, and also
owre lady, & seyntis that arosen with
criste.

¶ Þe first spere of þe 9 is clepid ‘primum mobile,’ þe
first mevabil thyng.

¶ Þe .ij. spere of sterris: Aries .1. þe rame. ¶ the
secund hows of Mars, þe bool, ¶ þe secund hows of Venus, Gemini, ¶ þe
secund hows of Mercuri, Cancer. ¶ þe hows of þe mone, leo. þe
hows of þe sonne, Virgo. // þe first hows of Mercury,
Libra // þe first hows of Venus, Scorpio // þe first hows of
Mars, Sagittarius // þe first hows of Iubiter,
Capricornus // þe first hows of Saturne,
Aquarius // þe secund hows of Saturne, Piscis. /
þe secunde hows of Iubiter

[no more].

¶ Saturn is a planete evel-willid and ful of sekenes. Wherfore he is
peyntid with an hooke, for he repeþ dow{n)} grene
thyngis /
he fulfilliþ his course in xxx ȝeere.

¶ Iubiter is a planete wele willyng to alle thingis
to be gendrid, plent[i]ful & plesyng; therfor he is y-seid
Iubiter as helpyn. in xij [ȝ]eere he filliþ his
course.

¶ Mars is an enemy to alle thyngis to be gendrid; wherfor he is
clepid god of batel, for he is ful of tempest. he fulfilliþ his course
in .ij. ȝeere.

[leaf 26, back]

¶ Þe sonne is þe worthiest planet, y-set in myddis. he fulfilliþ
his course in CCClxv dayes & vj. howris, þe whiche causen
bisext.

¶ Venus is apte to alle thyngis to be gendrid. he fulfilliþ his
course in CCCxxxvj daies.

¶ Mercuri swyft is y-seid a messenger of daies [? heuene]. he
fulfilliþ his course in CCCxxxvj daies.

¶ Þe mone is a planete ny þe erþe.

[ends.]

1.
lis is the MS. l with a line at right angles to it.


27
 

NOTES
ON THE CHEMISTRY OF THE TEXT
By C.H. GILL, Esq., of University College,
London

P. 4. Direction to submit any wine that is not
sour to distillation. (Sour wine is deficient in alcohol;
that body having been changed into acetic acid by oxidation.) In the
language of the mystical ideas which prevailed in the dawn of Chemistry,
the colouring matters, sugar, &c. of the wine are called ‘the .4.
elementis,’ or as it were the ‘rotten fæces of wine’??

The direction to distill the wine seven times is a good practical
suggestion for the obtaining of strong alcohol which will burn well.
Then follows a description of the distilling apparatus, which seems to
have been arranged to ensure a very slow distillation, so as to obtain a
product as colourless and scentless as possible.

P. 5. The second way to make the Quinte essence
depends on distillation of alcohol by means of the heat of fermenting
horse-dung; also the fifth manner.

P. 6. The directions for gilding burning water
are all nonsense; but as the writer had no means of testing the truth of
his statements, they may have been made in good faith.

P. 7. The idea which he expresses, that this gilt
burning water will make you well and young, is difficult to explain,
except on the assumption that, it being the strongest of alcohol, a very
little served to produce that elevation of spirits which seemed to bring
back the spring of youth.

P. 7, l. 6 from the bottom. The word
liquibles in the text does not mean liquids, for a liquid cannot
be made hot enough to be quenched. If
28
 
the original liquibles cannot be retained I should substitute the
word liquiables, meaning those things which can be liquefied by
heat. Indeed in the next passage we find stated that if Saturn (the
alchemists’ mystical name for Lead) be quenched, &c., and that if
then Mars (Iron) be quenched in the same liquid, it will acquire the
softness of Saturn. Or if you quench lead in spirit which has had iron
first cooled in it, it becomes hard.

Of course there is no truth whatever in the above statements.

P. 8. The fire without coals, &c., is
‘corrosive sublimate,’ most probably containing an excess of Sulphuric
acid (vitriol) as an impurity. If Copper (Venus) or Tin (Jupiter) be
dipt into this solution of mercury they will have a deposit of mercury
formed on their surface, which will give them a pearly appearance.

P. 8. To bring Gold into calx. When gold is
treated in the way directed, a fine powder of gold of a brown or yellow
colour is left. This might readily have been mistaken for a calx by
those who had no clear ideas of what calx really was.

P. 9. The departing of gold from silver is
essentially the same as the plan practised at the present day.

To get the Quintessence of Gold. I can make nothing of the directions,
that is, I cannot see that they (the directions) hide any real
truth.

P. 10. How to get the Quintessence of Antimony.
I can make nothing of this part, and can only suggest that the vinegar
used contained hydrochloric acid, and when distilled with ‘Myn Antimony’
(native sulphide of antimony) gave a distillate of Chloride of Antimony
containing some ‘kermes’ which is red.

From this point onward there is little or nothing that can be explained
by a Chemist.

29
 
GLOSSARY.




Agu,
p. 22, l. 1, ‘Intermittent Feaver, commonly called an Ague, has
certain times of Intermission or ceasing; it begins for the most part
with Cold or Shivering, ends in Heat, and returns exactly at set
Periods.’ Phillips.

Aischin,
p. 4, l. 10, ashes.

Amphora,
p. 11, &c., ‘a large vessel which derived its name from its being
made with a handle on each side of the neck, from ἀμφί on both
sides, and φέρω I carry.’ Dict. of Gr. and Rom.
Ant.

Anele,
p. 6, l. 26, &c., heat?

Apostemes,
p. 24, l. 24, imposthumes, boils.

Appeire,
p. 3, l. 12, impair, worsen.

Arreins,
p. 2, l. 25, spiders.

‘Cassia Fistula (Lat.),
Cassia in the Pipe or Cane, a kind of Reed or Shrub that grows in
India and Africa, bearing black, round, and long Cods, in
which is contain’d a soft black Substance, sweet like Honey, and of a
purging Quality.’ Phillips.

Colaciouns,
p. 18, l. 21, ? comments, homilies.

Comounne,
p. 3, l. 35, communicate.

‘Continual Feaver
is that whose Fit is continu’d for many Days; having its times of
Abatement, and of more Fierceness; altho’ it never intermits, or leaves
off.’ Phillips.

Deedly,
p. 3, l. 24, liable to death, mortal.

Departynge,
p. 5, l. 14, parting, separating.

Depurid,
p. 9, l. 27, purified, purged.

Distillatorie,
p. 10, l. 24, a still. Randle Holme, (Academy, p. 422, col. 2,)
speaks of ‘a Still or Distillatory Instrument,’ and further on, iv., ‘He
beareth Sable, the Head of a Distillatory with 3 pipes; having as
many Receivers or Bottles set to them.’

‘Ebulum or Ebulus (Lat.),
the Herb Wall-wort, Dane-wort, or Dwarf-elder.’
Phillips.


Encorpere,
p. 13, l. 4, mix, incorporate.


Euforbii,
p. 21, l. 3 bot., ‘Euphorbia, the Libyan Ferula, a Tree or Shrub
first found by King Juba, and so call’d from the Name of his
Physician Euphorbus.’ Phillips.


Euphorbium, ‘the gummy Juice or Sap of that Tree much us’d in Physick
and Surgery.’ Phillips.


Extremities,
p. 17, l. 2, ends of the limbs.


Fecis,
p. 4, l. 7; p. 9, dregs.


Fire of hell,
p. 8, l. 23, a disease.


Fumiter,
p. 18, l. 3, fumitory.


Fyme,
p. 10, l. 2 bot., mud, clay.


Gerapigra galieni,
p. 3, l. 29, ἱερα πικρα Γαληνου.


 
Giltid,
p. 7, l. 3, having the properties of gold communicated by it.


Groste,
p. 5, ll. 9, 29, grossness, heavy particles, residuum.


Hide,
p. 13, l. 18, ? for hideus; compare the Harleian reading
‘unkinde.’


Hool,
p. 15, l. 10, recover, improve.


Incombustible,
p. 10, l. 2.


Incorruptibility,
p. 7, l. 2.


Kynde,
p. 1, l. 12, all creatures; l. 13, nature.


‘Lapis Lazuli
a kind of Azure or Sky-colour’d Stone, of which the Blew Colour call’d
Ultramarine is made .. much us’d in Physick.’ Phillips.


Lembike,
p. 9, l. 2, ‘Alembick or Limbeck (Arab.), a Still, a Chymical Vessel
used in Distilling, shaped like a Helmet, and towards the Bottom having
a Beak or Nose, about a Foot and a half long, by which the Vapours
descend. They are commonly made of Copper tinn’d over on the inside, and
often of Glass.’ Phillips.


Liquibles,
p. 7, l. 6 bot., meltable metals.


Lymayl,
p. 8, l. 6 bot., Fr. ‘limaille: f. File-dust, pinne-dust.’
Cotgrave.




Marien Bath,
p. 12, l. 7 bot., Balneum Mariæ, a Chemist’s bath. ‘Bain de
Marie. Maries bath; a cauldron, or kettle full of hot water.’
Cotgrave.


Medle,
p. 19 last line, mix.


Medulla,
p. 18, l. 3, pith.


Mercasite,
p. 10, l. 14, ‘a kind of Mineral Stone, hard and brittle, partaking of
the Nature and Colour of the Metal it is mixed with; some call it a
Fire-Stone.’ Phillips.


Mercuriale,
mercurie, p. 21, 19, &c., ‘Mercury .. among Chymists .. signifies
Quick-silver; and is also taken for one of their active Principles,
commonly call’d Spirit .. Also the Name of a purging Herb, of
which there are two sorts, viz. Good Harry and Dog’s
Mercury.’


Metis,
p. 16, l. 22, meatus, passages.


Mon,
p. 13, l. 19. ?


Morsus Gallinæ,
the Herb Henbit or Chick-weed. Phillips.


Mortifie,
p. 19 last line, ‘Among Chymists to change the outward Form or Shape of
a Mixt Body; as when Quicksilver, or any other Metal, is dissolved in an
acid Menstruum.’ Phillips.


Neischede,
p. 7, l. 2 bot., neshness, softness, pliancy.


Oo,
p. 4, one.


Popilion,
p. 22, l. 24; ‘Populeum, an Ointment made of Poplar buds, of a cooling
and allaying Quality.’ Phillips. Fr. ‘Populeon. Popilion,
a Pompillion; an ointment made of blacke Poplar buds.’ Cot.


Preparate,
p. 8, l. 21, prepare.


‘Quartan Ague
is that whose Fit returns every fourth Day.’ Phillips.


Quenchour,
p. 6 at foot, cooling the florin ?


Quintessence is defined by Phillips as ‘the purest Substance drawn out
of any Natural Body; a Medicine made of the efficacious active Particles
of its Ingredients separated from all Fæces or Dregs; the Spirit,
chief Force, or Virtue of any thing.’

 
Reme,
p. 9, l. 5 bot., A.S. reoma, a strap, thong.


Reparale,
p. 8, l. 21, make, compound.


Respire,
p. 4, l. 5 from foot, exhale.


Restreyne,
p. 7, l. 8, retain.


Reward,
p. 2, l. 4, 7, regard.


Rotombe,
p. 10, l. 3 bot., a retort.


Sambucy,
p. 16, l. 7 bot., ‘Sambucus, the Elder-Tree; a Shrub of very great use
in Physic.’ Phillips.


Stafisagre,
p. 20, l. 1, ‘Staphis agria, the Herb Staves-acre, or Lice-bane.’
Phillips.


‘Tertian Ague or Feaver
is that which intermits entirely,
and returns again every third Day with its several Symptoms at a set
Time.’ Phillips.


To,
p. 1, l. 16, too.


Triacle,
p. 23, l. 5, cordial, ‘Treacle, a Physical Composition, made of Vipers
and other Ingredients.’ Phillips.


Turbit,
p. 16, l. 7 bot., ‘Turbit, Tripoly, an Herb called Turbith, or blew
Camomel.’


‘Turbith, an Herb so call’d by the Arabians, which grows in Cambaya,
Surat, and other parts of Asia; a dangerous Drug upon account of its
violent purging Quality.’ Phillips.

Vapoure,
p. 8, l. 5 from foot; p. 9 at foot, evaporate.


Woodnes,
p. 22, l. 23, wildness, madness.


Ypericon,
p. 19, l. 16, ‘Hypericon, St. John’s-Wort, an excellent Herb for
Wounds, and to provoke Urine.’ Phillips.






Errata and Technical Notes
The character “l-bar” ƚ (html entity #410 or x019A) has been
represented in this text by “l-stroke” ł (#322 or x0142), as it is
much more widely available.
Two entries in the Table of Contents were merged in the printed book,
apparently for reasons of space. The original form was:



HOW TO CURE FRENSY, GOUT, AND TROUBLES FROM DEVILS, WICKED THOUGHTS,
ETC., p. 17; AND HOW OUR QUINTE ESSENCE IS HEAVEN
19


See also comments on footnotes, especially Footnote
15 with linked page image.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Book Of Quinte Essence Or The
Fifth Being (1889), by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF QUINTE ESSENCE ***

***** This file should be named 17179-h.htm or 17179-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/1/7/17179/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.