The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or 1453, by John Kirtland Wright: a Project Gutenberg eBook










large { font-size:125%; }
sc    { font-variant:small-caps; font-style: normal; }

/* == GLOBAL MARKUP == */
body, table.twocol tr td  { margin-left:2em; margin-right:2em; }   /* BODY */
.box     { border-style:double; margin-bottom:2em; max-width:30em; margin-right:auto; margin-left:auto; margin-top:2em; clear:both; }
.box p   { margin-right:1em; margin-left:1em; }
.box dl  { margin-right:1em; margin-left:1em; }
h1, h2, h5, h6, .titlepg p { text-align:center; clear:both; }   /* HEADINGS */
h2                { margin-top:1.5em; margin-bottom:1em; }
h1                { margin-top:3em; }
div.box h1        { margin-top:1em; }
div.box h2        { margin-top:1em; }
h3                { margin-top:2.5em; text-align:center; font-size:100%; clear:both; font-variant:small-caps; }
h4                { font-size:110%; text-align:center; clear:right; font-style:italic; }
h4                { font-size:110%; text-align:center; clear:right; font-style:italic; }
h6                { font-size:100%; }
h6.var            { font-size:80%; font-style:normal; }
.titlepg          { margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto; border-style:double; clear:both; }
span.chaptertitle { font-style:normal; display:block; text-align:center; font-size:150%; }
.tblttl           { text-align:center; }
.tblsttl          { text-align:center; font-variant:small-caps; }

pre sub.ms { width:4em; letter-spacing:1em; }
table.fmla { text-align:center; margin-top:0em; margin-bottom:0em; margin-left:0em; margin-right:0em; }
table.inline, table.symbol { display: inline-table; vertical-align: middle; }
td.cola           { text-align:left; vertical-align:100%; }
td.colb           { text-align:justify; }

p, blockquote, div.p, div.bq { text-align:justify; }                              /* PARAGRAPHS */
div.p, div.bq   { margin-top:1em; margin-bottom:1em; }
blockquote, .bq { margin-left:1em; margin-right:0em; }
.verse    { font-size:100%; }
p.indent  {text-indent:2em; text-align:left; }
p.tb, p.tbcenter, verse.tb, blockquote.tb      { margin-top:2em; }

span.pb, div.pb, dt.pb, p.pb                                      /* PAGE BREAKS */
{ text-align:right; float:right; margin-right:0em; clear:right; }
div.pb { display:inline; }
.pb, dl.index dt.pb, dl.toc dt.pb, dl.tocl dt.pb    { text-align:right; float:right; margin-left: 1.5em;
         margin-top:.5em; margin-bottom:.5em; display:inline; text-indent:0;
         font-size:80%; font-style:normal; font-weight:bold;
         color:gray; border:1px solid gray;padding:1px 3px; }
div.index .pb  { display:block; }
.bq  div.pb, .bq span.pb  { font-size:90%; margin-right:2em; }

div.img, body a img  {text-align:center; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto; margin-top:1em; margin-bottom:0em; clear:right; }
img  { margin-bottom:0; margin-top:0; }
sup, a.fn { font-size:75%; vertical-align:100%; line-height:50%; font-weight:normal; }
h3   a.fn { font-size:65%; }
sub { font-size:75%; }
.center, .tbcenter       { text-align:center; clear:both; }                  /* TEXTUAL MARKUP */
span.center              { display:block; }
table.center { clear:both; margin-right:auto; margin-left:auto; }
table.center tr td.l  {text-align:left; margin-left:0em; text-indent:0; }
table.center tr td.t  {text-align:left; text-indent:1em; }
table.center tr td.t2 {text-align:left; text-indent:2em; }
table.center tr td.r  {text-align:right; }
table.center tr th    {vertical-align:bottom; }
table.center tr td    {vertical-align:top; text-indent:0; }
table.inline, table.symbol { display: inline-table; vertical-align: middle; }

p           { clear:left; }
.small, .lsmall      { font-size:90%; }
h2 .small            { font-size:67%; }
.smaller    { font-size:80%; }
.smallest   { font-size:67%; }
.larger     { font-size:150%; }
.large      { font-size:125%; }
.xlarge     { font-size:200%; line-height:60%; }
.xxlarge    { font-size:200%; line-height:60%; }
.gs         { letter-spacing:1em; }
.gs3        { letter-spacing:2em; }
.gslarge    { letter-spacing:.3em; font-size:110%; }
.sc         { font-variant:small-caps; font-style:normal; }
.unbold     { font-weight:normal; }
.xo         { position:relative; left:-.3em; }
.over, over { text-decoration: overline; display:inline; }
hr          { width:20%; }
.jl         { text-align:left; }
.jr         { text-align:right; min-width:2em; display:inline-block; float:right; }
.jr1        { text-align:right; margin-right:2em; }
h1 .jr      { margin-right:.5em; }
.ind1       { text-align:left;  margin-left:2em; }
.u          { text-decoration:underline; }
.hst        { margin-left:2em; }
.hst2        { margin-left:4em; }
.rubric     { color:red; }
.cnwhite    { color:white; background-color:black; min-width:2em; display:inline-block;
              text-align:center; font-weight:bold; font-family:sans-serif; }
.cwhite     { color:white; background-color:black; text-align:center; font-weight:bold;
              font-family:sans-serif; }
ul  li      { text-align:justify; }
.f          { font-style:normal; }

dd.t           { text-align:left; margin-left: 5.5em; }
dl.toc         { clear:both; margin-top:1em; }                    /* CONTENTS (.TOC) */
.toc  dt.center    { text-align:center; clear:both; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em;}
.toc  dt      { text-align:right; clear:left; }
.toc  dd      { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:2em; }
.toc  dd.ddt  { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:4em; }
.toc  dd.ddt2 { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:5em; }
.toc  dd.ddt3 { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:6em; }
.toc  dd.ddt4 { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:7em; }
.toc  dd.ddt5 { text-align:right; clear:both; margin-left:8em; }
.toc  dd.note { text-align:justify; clear:both; margin-left:5em; text-indent:-1em; margin-right:3em; }
.toc  dt .xxxtest {width:17em; display:block; position:relative; left:4em; }
.toc  dt  a,
.toc  dd  a,
.toc dt span.left,
.toc dt span.lsmall,
.toc dd span.left { text-align:left; clear:right; float:left; }
.toc  dt  a  span.cn { width:3em; text-align:right; margin-right:.7em;  float:left; }
.toc  dt.sc   { text-align:right;  clear:both; }
.toc  dt.scl  { text-align:left;   clear:both; font-variant:small-caps; }
.toc  dt.sct  { text-align:right;  clear:both; font-variant:small-caps; margin-left:1em; }
.toc  dt.jl   { text-align:justify;  clear:both; font-variant:normal; margin-left:3em;
                margin-right:3em; text-indent:0em; margin-top:0; }
.toc  dt.scc  { text-align:center; clear:both; font-variant:small-caps; }
.toc  dt span.lj { text-align:left; display:block; float:left; }
.toc  dd.center { text-align:center; }
dd.tocsummary {text-align:justify; margin-right:2em; margin-left:2em; }
dd.center sc  {display:block; text-align:center; }
/* BOX CELL */
td.top { border-top:1px    solid; width:.5em; height:.8em; }
td.bot { border-bottom:1px solid; width:.5em; height:.8em; }
td.rb  { border:1px solid; border-left:none;  width:.5em; height:.8em;  }
td.lb  { border:1px solid; border-right:none; width:.5em; height:.8em;  }

/* INDEX (.INDEX) */
dl.index   { clear:both; }
.index dd  { margin-left:4em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:left; }
.index dt  { margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:left; }
.index dt.center {text-align:center; }

.abx, .abl {
font-weight:bold; text-decoration:none;
border-style:solid; border-color:gray; border-width:1px;
margin-right:0px; margin-top:5px; display:inline-block; text-align:center; }
.ab { width:1em; }

                                                           /* FOOTNOTE BLOCKS */
div.notes p  { margin-left:1em; text-indent:-1em; text-align:justify; }

dl.undent dd   { margin-left:3em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:justify; }
dl.undent dt   { margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:justify; }
dl.undent dd.t { margin-left:4em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:justify; }
                                                           /* POETRY LINE NUMBER */
.lnum   { text-align:right; float:right; margin-left:.5em; display:inline; }

.hymn     { text-align:left; }                                  /*  HYMN AND VERSE: HTML  */
.verse    { text-align:left; margin-top:1em; margin-bottom:1em; margin-left:0em; }
.versetb  { text-align:left; margin-top:2em; margin-bottom:1em; margin-left:0em; }
.originc  { text-align:center; }
.subttl   { text-align:center; font-size:80%; }
.srcttl   { text-align:center; font-size:80%; font-weight:bold; }
p.t0, p.l { margin-left:4em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.lb                 { margin-left:4em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:2em; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.tw, div.tw, .tw    { margin-left:1em;  text-indent:-1em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t,  div.t,  .t     { margin-left:5em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t2,  div.t2,  .t2  { margin-left:6em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t3,  div.t3,  .t3  { margin-left:7em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t4,  div.t4,  .t4  { margin-left:8em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t5,  div.t5,  .t5  { margin-left:9em;  text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t6,  div.t6,  .t6  { margin-left:10em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t7,  div.t7,  .t7  { margin-left:11em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t8,  div.t8,  .t8  { margin-left:12em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t9,  div.t9,  .t9  { margin-left:13em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t10, div.t10,.t10  { margin-left:14em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t11, div.t11,.t11  { margin-left:15em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t12, div.t12,.t12  { margin-left:16em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t13, div.t13,.t13  { margin-left:17em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t14, div.t14,.t14  { margin-left:18em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.t15, div.t15,.t15  { margin-left:19em; text-indent:-3em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:left; }
p.lr, div.lr, span.lr { display:block; margin-left:0em; margin-right:1em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; text-align:right; }
dt.lr                { width:100%; margin-left:0em; margin-right:0em; margin-top:0; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:1em; text-align:right; }
dl dt.lr a           { text-align:left; clear:left; float:left; }

.fnblock   { margin-top:2em; }
.fndef     { text-align:justify; margin-top:1.5em; margin-left:1.5em; text-indent:-1.5em; }
.fndef p.fncont, .fndef dl { margin-left:0em; text-indent:0em; }
dl.catalog dd { font-style:italic; }
dl.catalog dt { margin-top:1em; }
.author { text-align:right; margin-top:0em; margin-bottom:0em; display:block; }

p.biblio { margin-left:1em; text-align:justify; text-indent:-1em; }
dl.biblio  dt        { margin-top:.6em; margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em; text-align:justify; clear:both; }
dl.biblio  dt  div   { display:block; float:left; margin-left:-6em; width:6em; clear:both; }
dl.biblio  dt.center { margin-left:0em; text-align:center; }
dl.biblio  dd        { margin-top:.3em; margin-left:3em; text-align:justify; font-size:90%; }
.clear     { clear:both; }
p.book     { margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em; }
p.review   { margin-left:2em; text-indent:-2em; font-size:80%; }
p.pcap     { margin-left:auto; text-indent:0em; text-align:center; margin-top:0;
              font-weight:bold; font-size:90%; max-width:35em; margin-right:auto; }
p.pcapc    { margin-left:4.7em; text-indent:0em; text-align:justify; }
span.pn    { display:inline-block; width:4.7em; text-align:left; margin-left:0; text-indent:0; }
div.sidenote  { max-width:50%; float:left; clear:left;

                margin-bottom:1em; font-weight:bold; font-size:90%; }






The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or 1453, by 
John Kirtland Wright

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or 1453
       In the Collections of the American Geographical Society

Author: John Kirtland Wright

Release Date: November 9, 2016 [EBook #53480]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEARDO MAP OF WORLD, 1452 OR 1453 ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net












Fig. 1—The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or 1453.High-resolution Color Image


AMERICAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
LIBRARY SERIES NO. 4
THE LEARDO MAP OF THE WORLD
1452 OR 1453
In the Collections of the
American Geographical Society
BY
JOHN KIRTLAND WRIGHT, Ph.D.
Librarian, American Geographical Society
WITH A NOTE ON THE REPRODUCTION OF THE MAP
BY
A. B. HOEN



AMERICAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
BROADWAY AT 156TH STREET
NEW YORK
1928

COPYRIGHT, 1928
BY
THE AMERICAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF NEW YORK
RUMFORD PRESS
CONCORD, N. H.
iii
CONTENTS

PAGE
The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or 1453 1
The Calendar and the Inscription Beneath It 2
The Map Disk 4
Sources of Leardo’s Geography 6
The Known World According to Leardo 10
Asia 10
Africa 15
The Mediterranean 16
Europe 17
Notes 21
Appendix: Detailed Comments on the Map 31
Explanation 31
I. Northern Asia 32
II. Far Eastern Asia 35
III. India 37
IV. Central Asia 40
V. Persia 41
VI. Mesopotamia and Syria 42
VII. Arabia 44
VIII. Asia Minor 45
IX. Armenia, Caucasia, and Southeastern Russia 46
X. Indian Ocean, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea 47
XI. Southern Africa 47
XII. Middle and Lower Nile Region 49
XIII. Upper Nile Region and West Africa 50
XIV. North Africa 52
XV. Black and Mediterranean Seas 54
XVI. Southwestern Europe 55
XVII. Atlantic Ocean and Islands 56
XVIII. Central Europe 56
XIX. Italy 57
XX. Southeastern Europe 57
XXI. Baltic Sea 58
XXII. Scandinavia 58
XXIII. Eastern Europe 59
XXIV. Far North 60
List of References 63
The Reproduction of the Leardo Map, by A. B. Hoen 71

v
ILLUSTRATIONS

FIG. PAGE
1. The Leardo map of the world, 1452 or 1453 frontispiece
2. Passage from mid-eighteenth century manuscript of the Doge Marco Foscarini referring to Leardo map of 1447 23
3. Passage from mid-eighteenth century manuscript of Giovanni Agostini referring to Leardo map of 1447 23
4. General key map at end of book
5. Detailed key map; northeastern section at end of book
6. Detailed key map; east-central section at end of book
7. Detailed key map; southeastern section at end of book
8. Detailed key map; northwestern section at end of book
9. Detailed key map; west-central section at end of book
10. Detailed key map; southwestern section at end of book

1
THE LEARDO MAP OF THE WORLD
1452 OR 1453
The notes will be found on pp. 21-28.
In 1906 Archer M. Huntington, Esq., presented
to the American Geographical Society one of three
known maps of the world signed and dated by the
Venetian, Giovanni Leardo. Of these, the oldest,
as well as the crudest and simplest, is preserved in
the Communal Library at Verona and carries the
date 1442.[1] The second (1448), somewhat more
elaborate in design, belongs to the Civic Museum at
Vicenza.[2] The Society’s map,[3] the largest of the
three, bears the signature in the lower right-hand
corner: Johanes Leardus de Venetteis me fezit abano
domini 145[?]. The last digit in this inscription
is partly mutilated; the date, however, is probably
either 1452 or 1453.[4]
The Society’s map is of primary interest as revealing
a conception of the earth’s surface typical
of the century preceding the discovery of America.
In its blending of colors and pleasing general composition
it forms a work of art of no slight decorative
value. Furthermore, the encircling calendar and
many details on the map proper are distinctly
unusual.[5] The Society has therefore undertaken the
publication of a full-sized colored facsimile, in explanation
of which the present book was prepared. Drawn
on a piece of parchment measuring 28½ by 23⅜
inches (72.4 × 59.4 cm.), the original is in a fair state
of preservation except for two pieces torn from the
left-hand side, for discolorations, and for the fading
2
of some of the inscriptions. Fortunately, no part
of the map itself has been seriously injured.
The Calendar and the Inscription Beneath It
The calendars encircling Leardo’s three maps
constitute exceptional additions. Of these calendars,
the one on the Society’s map is the most interesting.
The inscription in the panel below the circles, in
part an explanation of the calendar, is somewhat
awkwardly phrased in the Venetian dialect of the
fifteenth century, but, although it lacks the beginning
of each line, the meaning is fairly clear,
especially when certain of the missing lines are
reconstructed from the corresponding inscription on
the map in Vicenza.[6]
In the first two lines the cartographer makes an
excursion into the realm of theology. According
to Dr. Arthur C. McGiffert, to whom the present
writer submitted the passage, this part of the inscription
is “evidently not the work of a theologian,
for it makes God the creator ‘of all things created
and uncreated’ (the credal phrase is ‘things visible
and invisible’), and in the next clause runs the
Trinity (‘three persons and one common substance’)
and the person of Christ together as if they were the
same thing. There are reminiscences of the Nicene
creed, but the whole is theologically a hodge-podge.”
This passage is followed by a statement that the
map shows how the land and islands stand in
relation to the seas and how the many provinces
and mountains and principal rivers are distributed
3
on the land. Then, on the asserted authority of
Macrobius, “a very excellent astrologer and geometrician,”
figures are given for the dimensions of the
earth and of various heavenly bodies. These are
quite fanciful, bearing little relation to the corresponding
figures actually cited by Macrobius.[7]
The astronomical details are followed in the third
paragraph by the explanation of the calendar.
The latter consists of eight concentric circles, of
which the innermost gives the dates of Easter for
ninety-five years, from April 1, 1453, to April 10,
1547; when Easter falls in April, A is written in the
small compartment, when in March, M; leap years
are designated by B (“bissextile years”).
The second circle shows the names of the months,
beginning with March, which was officially reckoned
the first month of the year in the Republic of Venice
until as late as 1797[8]; it also tells the day, hour,
and minute when the sun enters each of the twelve
signs of the zodiac.
The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth circles enable
one to calculate the phases of the moon. In the
third circle the first nineteen letters of the alphabet
represent in order the years of the Metonic lunisolar
cycle. These years were usually designated by the
golden numbers, but before the Gregorian reform
letters were frequently employed in place of the
numbers. Leardo explains that C stands for 1453,
D for 1454, and so on until T is reached, after which
we begin over again at A.[9] A letter is placed
opposite the figures (in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
4
circles) showing respectively the day of the month,
the hour of the day, and the “point of the hour” at
which the “conjunction of the moon” (i. e. new
moon) will take place in the years to which the letter
refers. For example, there will be a new moon on
April 8, 1453, at 16 hours, 200 points.[10] Leardo
adds that there are 1080 points in an hour.[11]
The seventh circle gives the dominical, or “Sunday,”
letters; these are indicated opposite the days
of the month (fourth circle) on which Sunday falls
in the years designated by the seven first letters of
the alphabet. If we know the dominical letter for
any particular year, we may thus determine the
days of the week.[12] Leardo, however, does not
specify the years to which the dominical letters in
his calendar refer.
The eighth and ninth circles give the lengths of
the days in hours and minutes.[13] From this we see
that the vernal equinox fell on March 11, inasmuch
as the calendar was constructed before the Gregorian
reform. Finally, in the tenth circle saints’ days and
other religious festivals are shown.[14]
The four figures in the spaces between the calendar
and the outer edge of the parchment represent the
four evangelists: the lion for St. Mark, the bull for
St. Luke, the angel for St. Matthew, and the eagle
(of which only the head shows) for St. John.[15]
The Map Disk
It should be noted first that east is at the top of
the map and Jerusalem at the center; hence the long
5
axis of the Mediterranean runs vertically up the
southern half of the disk.
With the exception of the Red Sea, appropriately
colored, the seas are uniformly blue. The lands
are left the natural color of the bleached parchment
except for a fiery red region in the far south bearing
the legend: “Desert uninhabited because of heat,”
and a dreary brown waste in the far north marked:
“Desert uninhabited because of cold.” Islands
are tinted either red or yellow, with green patches
in the interior of Great Britain and Ireland. The
only other natural features depicted are mountains,
rivers, and lakes, although certain deserts are
mentioned in legends. Mountain ranges are represented
by rows of mounds, alternately red, green,
and blue, and each rising symmetrically in two or
three steps. Rivers are blue and, as frequently on
medieval maps, sometimes connect one sea with
another, or at least have common sources. A yellow
lake, labeled “Sandy Sea,” lies in the midst of the
Sahara.
Vignettes of castles, walled towns, and churches
stand for cities, kingdoms, and regions. In most
cases the names have been written upon the vignettes
themselves; since the latter are also colored
pink or green, the letters are frequently obscured
and quite illegible. Many towns and districts are
shown by red dots beside which the names are
written in ink, once black but now faded with age.
These names were inserted after the vignettes were
drawn, for in many instances they are tilted or compressed
6
to fit the available space. The draftsman
did not venture to write any name to the left of the
dot to which it belongs; as he could not write on the
blue of the seas, he was obliged to invert the map in
the case of places on south-facing coasts. Names
of islands and seas, which had to be written on water
surfaces, are inclosed in small yellow panels. The
names of the continents, the two inscriptions relating
to the polar and equatorial deserts, and the words
“Terrestrial Paradise” are in red capitals; but all
other names are in minuscule, usually without an
initial capital. Besides place names there are a
few longer legends.
Winds blowing from the four cardinal and four
intermediate points of the compass are shown by
eight faces around the edge of the disk. Those to
the north, northwest, and northeast are blue, suggesting
cold blasts from these quarters; the other
faces are ruddy.
Although decorative, the Leardo map lacks
many of the pictorial elements—animals, birds,
preposterous monsters—that enliven the blank
spaces on other medieval maps. With the exception
of the eight wind faces and the symbolic figures of
the evangelists no living creatures, whether animals
or men, are graphically represented.
Sources of Leardo’s Geography
Briefly stated, the sources of Leardo’s geography
are to be sought in the information accumulated by
the Greeks and Romans, as added to and altered
7
during the early Middle Ages by the Church
Fathers on the basis of the interpretation of the
Bible and as later augmented by the work of medieval
travelers, merchants, and sailors.
At a very early period the Greeks developed the
idea (borrowed, perhaps, from the Babylonians[16])
that the earth is a flat disk surrounded by the Ocean
Stream. This conception seems to have given rise
to a cartographic tradition followed by certain
ancient and medieval map-makers who had long
outgrown the belief that the earth is actually flat.
Thus Leardo draws a circular land mass, or oikoumene,
surrounded by a narrow hem of water. We
cannot, however, question his belief in the sphericity
of the earth, for otherwise he could hardly have
held the views expressed in the panel below the
calendar. Furthermore, his two legends relating
to the fiery and frozen deserts echo a theory that
was propounded in classical times and based on the
hypothesis of a spherical earth. This theory,
worked out in detail by Crates of Mallos, is briefly
as follows.[17] Around the equatorial circumference
of the globe is a fiery zone so intensely hot that no
man can cross it. This zone cuts off all communication
with the southern hemisphere. The north and
south polar caps are uninhabitable because of the
cold. An ocean encircling the globe from north to
south intercepts communication with the half of the
northern hemisphere opposite the oikoumene. Many
maps were made in the Middle Ages to illustrate
this conception. Leardo presumably had it in mind
8
and did not intend to represent either a flat disk or a
complete hemisphere but merely a circular portion
of the earth’s surface lying north of the equator.
In its orientation, with east and the Terrestrial
Paradise at the top and with Jerusalem at the center,
the map follows the Christian tradition of the
earlier Middle Ages. Other features reflecting the
influence of the Scriptures are Noah’s Ark resting
on top of Mt. Ararat, Mt. Sinai, the exaggerated
length of the River Jordan, and an inscription in the
far northeast referring to Gog and Magog.
Later medieval contacts between Europe and
remote lands are revealed in names derived from
Marco Polo and possibly from other Western travelers
who had visited the Orient, as well as in the Arabic
names in Asia and Africa.
Medieval navigators’ charts also influenced
Leardo. Towards the close of the thirteenth
century sailors in the Mediterranean—particularly
Italians and Catalans—began making marine maps
(known as portolan charts) that far surpassed all
earlier maps in the accurate delineation of coast
lines. The majority of these show the Mediterranean
and Atlantic coasts of Europe and of north
Africa but little of the interior of the continents and
nothing of the farther parts of Asia. Some, however,
were used as the basis for maps of the world.
On the latter the shore lines were derived from the
navigators’ charts, and the remaining regions were
compiled from other sources. The Leardo map
belongs in this category.
9
Among the existing maps dating from the fourteenth
and early fifteenth centuries our Leardo map
is very closely related to the group of maps drawn
by the famous Catalan cartographers of Majorca
in the Balearic Islands. In its general outlines it is
so strikingly like a Catalan map of about 1450 now
preserved in the Este Library at Modena[18] that we
must assume a common cartographic ancestor at
no great distance back. There are, however, certain
legends on the Este map that Leardo does not give,
particularly the long inscriptions and a multitude
of place names on the Mediterranean and Atlantic
coasts. Leardo’s map, on the other hand, has features
not shown on the Este map. These are of
two sorts: (1) place names in Asia and Africa, the
counterparts of which may be found on other
Catalan[19] and Italian[20] maps of the period; and (2)
river, mountain, and province names taken directly
from Ptolemy. There are also not a few names
whose origins or counterparts on other maps I have
been unable to trace.
Ptolemy’s Geography had been neglected during
the earlier Middle Ages, but the enthusiastic interest
in Greek literature which characterized the early
Renaissance had led to its translation into Latin
shortly before Leardo’s time.[21] A strict interpretation
of Ptolemy’s data would have necessitated
a complete redrafting of the outlines of the continents,
as was done on the Ptolemaic atlases of the
mid- and late fifteenth century. Leardo made no
such attempt. The extent of his concession to the
10
Ptolemaic geography was to sprinkle a few of
Ptolemy’s names over a medieval base and to add
the Rivers Indus and Oechardes in eastern Asia.[22]
The Known World According to Leardo
The numbers in parentheses correspond to the reference numbers in the Appendix (pp. 32-60) and on the key maps at the end of the book.
In the Appendix (pp. 31-67) I have tried to
identify as many as possible of the names and other
features shown on the Leardo map with existing
places, or at least with corresponding features on
other maps of the period. Here I propose to conduct
the reader on a rapid sight-seeing tour around
the map, pointing out some of the most interesting
details only.
Asia
In the extreme north (left-hand side) there is a
large structure which looks like an Italian church
with its campanile (13). The legend beneath,
suggested ultimately by a passage from Marco Polo,
runs about thus: “[This is] the sepulcher of the
[Grand Khan] and they do this when he comes to be
carried for interment: he comes accompanied by
many armed men who kill those whom they find
on the roads, and they say that the souls of these are
blessed because they accompany the soul of the
Grand Khan to another life.” Marco Polo adds
that at the time of the funeral of Mangou Khan
20,000 persons were thus slain! The actual place
of burial of the Mongol Khans was in Cathay, far
away from northern Russia where Leardo, following
11
the model of Catalan maps, draws it. European
cartographers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
seem to have known and cared little about
the relative positions of places in Asia; as Italian
merchants by this time had established contacts
with the Mongols in southern Russia, what was
more natural than to place the Mongol overlord’s
tomb in the hinterland of the Black Sea? Here there
was more available space than in the Far East, and
here on Leardo’s map the Grand Khan’s tomb could
be made symmetrically to balance Prester John’s
palace across the map in Africa (299).
South of the sepulcher we see the River Volga
(6, 7) flowing into the northwestern corner of the
Caspian (250). A branch from the east (8), perhaps
the Kama, joins the Volga where the latter bends
at a right angle to the south. East of the lower
Volga is a “desert of thirty days” (10), Polo’s
mysterious demon-haunted desert of Lop, where the
traveler hears ringing bells and other uncanny
sounds (possibly “singing sands”). Like the Grand
Khan’s tomb, this desert is also wofully misplaced,
since the actual desert of Lop lies in eastern Chinese
Turkestan. The responsibility is not Leardo’s,
however, for the Lop desert is in the same place
on the Catalan Atlas of 1375 and on the Este
map.
Farther east, beyond a row of six castles representing
towns on the borderlands of China (35-40),
we come to a gulf of the encircling ocean and to a
great system of mountains. The gulf (11), which
12
contains three islands, appears in almost the same
position and form on the Este map, where there is
a legend explaining that on the islands griffons and
falcons are found and that the natives are not
allowed to kill them without the permission of the
Grand Khan of the Tatars. This is also from
Marco Polo, who writes that the islands where the
gerfalcons are bred lie so far north that the North
Star is left behind you in the south! The mountains
southeast of the gulf make an enclosure shaped
something like a θ (42-47). Inside the northern
half of this θ a legend tells us that “this is the
province of Gog and Magog, where many tribes of
the Jews were shut in” (70), referring to the medieval
tradition that Alexander the Great enclosed
Gog and Magog—the terrible hordes of Antichrist—within
the Caspian Mountains. On many maps
the mountains of Gog and Magog in the Far East
are named thus. Leardo, however, places “Mo
Gaspio” (Caspiae Montes) (4) north of the Caspian
Sea somewhat nearer the position at which Ptolemy
had placed them. To the mountains of Gog and
Magog he assigns names derived from Ptolemy’s
northeastern Asia. Running westward from the
southern basin formed by these mountains Leardo
has added a river (49), the Oechardes of Ptolemy.
Near the point where this river emerges from the
mountain rim we see a red spot labeled “Iron
gate” (72) and, immediately to the west, two short
red marks, “Statues of Alexander” (73). The
iron gate was built by Alexander in the wall enclosing
13
Gog and Magog, and the statues represent
trumpeters set up by Alexander to keep guard
over these unclean hordes. On the Catalan maps
the trumpeters themselves are shown with their
trumpets.
Immediately west of the statues appears “Mount
Tanacomedo” (48), an amusing instance of Leardo’s
carelessness; he has here evidently copied “Montana
Comedorum” from a Ptolemaic map, combining
the last part of the first word with the first part of
the last! At the extreme eastern edge of the world
disk we see the Terrestrial Paradise (63) surrounded
by an enormous wall to keep out curious intruders.
The River Indus flows southwestward to a great
delta near the entrance of the Persian Gulf (84).
Many of the place names in India correspond with
those of the Catalan maps and in turn were derived
from Marco Polo. The scene of St. Thomas’
mission and of the early introduction of Christianity
into India is indicated by the inscription: “Here
preached St. Thomas” (113).
In central Asia, we note two rivers entering the
eastern side of the Caspian Sea, the Jaxartes (117)
and Oxus (118). The Lake of Aral, in which these
great streams actually have their outlet, seems to
have been wholly unknown to the geographers both
of antiquity and of medieval Europe. Moslem
scholars, however, were aware of its existence.
Leardo’s castles of Organa and of Organzia (Urganj)
(120, 121) at the mouth of the Jaxartes and his
place name Orcania (132) on the Oxus recall
14
Matthew Arnold’s description of the Oxus at the
close of Sohrab and Rustum:

But the majestic river floated on ...
Right for the polar star, past Orgunjè,
Brimming, and bright, and large.

The Tigris and Euphrates (165, 166) join, reaching
the Persian Gulf (267) as a single stream flowing
between two large edifices that represent Susiana
(172) and Babylonia (173). To the east of the
Tigris a nameless river (139) having its headwaters
in a large lake (138) also enters the Persian Gulf.
This same stream on the Catalan Atlas and on the
Este map rises in a double source, two bodies of
water that have been identified with Lakes Van and
Urmia. Leardo connects the Euphrates (166) with
the Mediterranean through the Orontes (168) and
with the Red Sea (268) through the Jordan (167).
The most prominent feature in Arabia is Mecca
(211), a large domed and towered building in good
Italian Renaissance style and presumably representing
a mosque. Several corrupted Turkish place
names (227, 228, 229, 232) along with classical
names (224, 231, 233-235) appear in Asia Minor.
The Indian Ocean is filled with yellow and red
islands. A legend asserting that pepper and spice
are found in these islands (275) comes from Marco
Polo’s description of the East Indian archipelago.
The largest of all the islands, lying off the coast of
India, is marked Taprobana (269) and probably
represents Sumatra.
15
Africa
Leardo’s Africa, like that of the Este map, has a
very unusual shape. Two gulfs reach inland from
the Indian Ocean and from the Atlantic, partially
cutting off the southern extremity of the continent.
On the Este map the eastern gulf is not as prominent
as that of Leardo’s map, but the western is even
deeper. Kretschmer suggests that these features
have sprung from a combination of the ancient
doctrine of a vast austral continent with Ptolemy’s
theory that the Indian Ocean is surrounded by land.[23]
Certain Arabic maps show an eastward projection
of Africa like those of the Este map and Leardo,
although they do not indicate anything corresponding
to the western gulf.
Prester John’s castle (299) bulks large in the
interior of Africa. In the twelfth century, reports
spread through Europe of the vast realm of a
fabulous Christian monarch in the heart of Asia.
By the fourteenth century, however, Prester John’s
empire had been transferred to Africa, where it
became associated with the Christian kingdom of
Abyssinia. The elaborate edifice with which Leardo
represents Prester John’s empire may be intended
for the sumptuous palace described in the thirteenth-century
Letter of Prester John.
Like most medieval cartographers, Leardo makes
the Nile (312) rise in West Africa (338). In this he
follows Herodotus, Pliny, Mela, and other ancient
authorities. Ptolemy, however, seems to have had
16
a more correct view, placing the sources of the river
in the Mountains of the Moon in eastern Africa.
Nothing daunted, most of the fifteenth-century
cartographers who used the writings of Ptolemy
boldly transferred the Mountains of the Moon to
West Africa to suit their theory of the river’s course.
Thus, on the Leardo map we see the Montes Lunae
(334) on the north coast of the West African gulf.
Thence four streams flow north into a lake, out of
which the Nile makes its way eastward and another
stream flows westward into the Atlantic. The
latter stream represents, perhaps, a combination of
Niger and Senegal, of which some faint knowledge
may have been gained through traders who had
crossed the Sahara. The lower Nile is joined by the
River “Stapus” (313), doubtless the Astapus of
Ptolemy or the modern Blue Nile. On the Este
map this tributary rises in the Terrestrial Paradise,
there placed in East Africa.
To the mountain range of North Africa, the
Carena of the Catalan maps, Leardo has added
Ptolemaic names (385-392).
The Mediterranean
The outlines of the Mediterranean (433) and
Black Seas (431) are more correct than any other
features which Leardo draws. This, of course, is
due to the fact that they were derived ultimately
from the portolan charts. Leardo preserves the
faulty orientation of the Mediterranean characteristic
of the latter. If we assume that the perpendicular
17
line extending from the wind-blower off the
west coast of Spain through Jerusalem to the wind-blower
east of the Terrestrial Paradise is intended
to run due east and west, we see that the axis
of the Mediterranean with the adjoining shores
has been turned counter-clockwise some twelve
degrees. This is probably because of failure on
the part of the makers of the original portolan charts
to take into consideration the declination of the
compass.[24]
Leardo’s place names along the Mediterranean
and Black Sea coasts are all derived from the portolan
charts, although Leardo wrote names only where
it was easy to do so without crowding. The least
successful portion of Leardo’s Mediterranean coast
is that of Spain: the shore is here unduly elongated
as compared with that of the Este Catalan map,
Barcelona (475) and Ampurias (476) being placed
too far northeast on what ought to be the French
shore line.
Europe
As on the Catalan maps, the geography of northwestern
Europe is badly distorted. The Seine (448),
Rhine (487), and Elbe (488) all flow parallel with
one another but slightly to the south of west. The
course of the Danube (552) with its southern
branches is more true to nature. The Baltic Sea
(577) and Scandinavia are drawn much as on the
Este map.
21
NOTES
[1]Giuseppe Crivellari, Alcuni cimeli della cartografia medievale
esistenti a Verona, Florence, 1903, pp. 5-28.
[2]This map was discovered by Vincenzo Lazari in 1850. A
detailed description and interpretation of it will be found in
Santarem, Vol. 3, pp. 398-442 [fuller bibliographical details
regarding this and other abbreviated references in these notes will
be found on pp. 63-67]; black and white reproduction in Santarem’s
Atlas, Part 3, No. 49; also in A. E. Nordenskiöld, Periplus,
p. 61.
[3]The map was discovered in 1879 by Major Friedrich von
Pilat, Imperial Counsellor of the Austro-Hungarian Legation and
Consul-General of Austria-Hungary in Venice. At the time it
was presented to the Society a brief anonymous description
appeared in the Bulletin of the American Geographical Society,
Vol. 38, 1906, pp. 365-368. This was based upon a sixteen-page
pamphlet by Dr. Guglielmo Berchet, Il planisfero di Giovanni
Leardo dell’ anno 1452, Venice, 1880, accompanying a photographic
facsimile constituting No. XIV of the series Raccolta di
mappamondi e carte nautiche del XIII al XVI secolo published by
Ferdinand Ongania, Venice. Dr. Berchet’s paper, while useful
to the present writer, has on the whole proved disappointing
because of its many inaccuracies in transcriptions and also because
almost no attempt was made to deal with the place names, in
many respects the most interesting features of all.
[4]As much of this digit as remains might be the upper part of
either a 2, a 3, or a 7. Since the Easter calendar begins with
1453 the date could hardly be earlier than Easter, 1452. For the
same reason, it is not likely to have been as late as 1457, the only
possible date after 1453. On the Vicenza Leardo map the Easter
calendar begins with the year in which the map is dated, 1448; on
the Verona map of 1442 the calendar begins with the preceding
year, 1441. A discrepancy of four years between the beginning
of the calendar and the date of the map, however, is most
improbable.
Santarem, Vol. 3, p. 399, and Berchet, op. cit., p. 6, cite two
22
mid-eighteenth century MSS in the Library of St. Mark’s, Venice,
which contain entries relating to a map by Giovanni Leardo dated
1447. One of these MS is that of the Doge Marco Foscarini
(Codex ital., XI, 123, p. 42), the other that of a contemporary
scholar, Giovanni degli Agostini (Codex ital., VII, 291, p. 542;
this and the preceding reference were furnished to the present
writer by the Chief Librarian of the Library of St. Mark’s; they
do not agree exactly with the references as given by Santarem and
Berchet).
The passage from the Foscarini MS (Fig. 2) may be translated
thus: “Gio. Leardo, who flourished in 1440, made a planisphere on
parchment on which was written Leardius de Venetiis me fecit anno
1447. It was at the house of (era presso) Bernardo Trevisano.
Apostolo Zeno saw it many times and marveled at seeing the
exactness of the design.” The passage from the Agostini MS
(Fig. 3) runs as follows: “Giovanni Leardo: This (man) lived
shortly before the middle of the fifteenth century, and he delighted
in geography and spheres. In the Trevisan Library was preserved
a planisphere by him on parchment on which could be seen
delineated the whole terraqueous globe with all the signs and
celestial constellations, beneath which, according to his assertion,
every part is placed. At the bottom of this parchment these
words may be read: Joannes Leardius de Venetiis me fecit ab
anno 1447. It is curious to see how in his time, when not many
discoveries had been made and navigation was so little advanced,
the positions of the provinces and of the seas were conceived.”
Berchet, op. cit., p. 7, points out that the arms at the top of the
parchment of the Leardo map now belonging to the American
Geographical Society are those of the Trevisan house. He
reads incorrectly, however, the date given by Agostini as 1452,
concluding therefrom that the map mentioned by the latter was
the same as the Society’s map, the date of which he also reads
as 1452. In view of the actual difference in the dates, we may
conclude that Leardo constructed two maps for the Trevisan
family, and that the one dated 1447 is yet to be rediscovered.
23

Figs. 2 and 3—Passages from mid-eighteenth century manuscripts in the
Library of St. Mark’s, Venice, in which reference is made to a map by
Giovanni Leardo, dated 1447. See note 4.



Fig. 2—from manuscript of the Doge Marco Foscarini.



Fig. 3—from manuscript of Giovanni Agostini.

24
[5]Although the Society’s map is not, perhaps, one of the great,
outstanding monuments of medieval cartography, the assertion
of Theobald Fischer (Sammlung mittelalterlicher Welt- und Seekarten,
Venice, 1886, p. 104) that the Leardo maps of 1448 and
1452 were “von geringem Wert,” seems too harsh.
[6]There follows a transcription of this legend. Missing passages
supplied from the Vicenza map as transcribed on Santarem’s
reproduction are given in square brackets:
... chreatore de Tute le Cose chreate et non chreato et E En 3
persone et una medexima sustanzia et uno Idio El quale En .i.inita
(divinita?) E Incomprensibelle aiomeni et aianzelli quanti uisono
dal zentro per sino Ala zirconferenzia En umanita ... | ...
ene Maria et farsi homo pasibelle et sostener morte per Redimer
Lumana zenerazione et resusito Il Terzo zorno et asexe ... (en?)
ziello ala destera del padre et al nouisimo di zudigera zusti et pechatori.
Al nome de quel dio che cosi veramente chre ... at|
... como La Tera et le Ixole stano nel mare et Molte prouinzie
et monti et fiumi prenzipalli sono nela Tera El diamitro dela
Tera sie meglia 6857 secondo Macobrio ezelentisimo Astrologo et
geumetrico. El diamitro de Laqua| [sie meia 14796. El diametro
de laiere sie m]eglia 31929¹/₇. E diamitro del fuoguo 68191²/₇.
El diamitro de La Luna sie meglia 147149. El diamitro de mercurio
sie meia 20(?)7533. El diamitro de venus sie meglia 692703.
El diamitro del solle sie meia 1494781. El diamitro de mar(te)
|... eia 6532374¹/₇ (Jupiter). El diamitro de saturno sie
Meia 13997942⁴/₇. diamitrus horbis signiorum sie meia 29995591.
diamitrus horbis aplanes sie meia 64276266⁵/₇. diamitrus horbis
christalini sie meia 137724(?)856. pitagora dize che da La
|....
[El primo zircholo che zirconscrisse Il sopra schri]to mapamondo
sie de la raxon de la pasqua de la Rexurezione per Ani 95. Comenza
nel 1453 adi primo aprille conpie nel 1547 adi 10 Aprille. quando
si Troua nele caxelle Letera M aueremo La pasqua de marzo,
quando si Trouera Letera A Aueremo| [quando la viene daprille.
quando si troua letera B que]lano aueremo Bixestro. El segondo
zircolo sie de I12 mexi dellano et quando Il sole Entra En cadauno
dei 12 segni zelesti. El Terzo zircollo sie de 19 Letere de lalfabeto
per Atrouar la raxon de La Luna. El quarto zircollo sie dei
numeri (?)| [di zorni de mexi. El quinto sie de le ore.] El sesto
zircollo sie Iponti de le hore. El setimo zircollo sie Le Letere
dominicale. Lotauo zircollo sie Le ore de La grandeza del di
En tututo (sic!) El tenpo de lano (?). El nono zircolo sie dei
menudi che auanza oltra Le ore ne la grandeza del di. El dezim
|... uoler sapere quando rinoua La Luna de Zugnio del
1453. nel dito mileximo Abiamo per letera concorente Letera C.
Auoler atrouar La conioncion de la Luna dobiamo Atrouar Letera
C nel mexe de zugnio E alincotro se trouera di.. |... (rin)
ouera La Luna de cadauno mexe del dito mileximo. El mileximo
comenz(a) de Zenaro nel 1454 aueremo concorente Letera d ecosi se
schore ogniano 1 Letera de lalfabeto. Et quando sizunze aletera T
l’Altro ano drieto sitorna Aletera A. |... raxone comenza
Ala Leuar del solle e intendese atanti di et Atante hore et atanti (?)
ponti. ponti 1080 sintende 1 hora. Ale fiade En uno mexe si
troua 2 fiade una Letera en quel mexe La luna rinoua 2 fiade etc.
25
[7]By the “diameters” of the sun, moon, and planets Leardo
obviously means the diameters of the orbits. Macrobius,
Commentaria in somnium Scipionis, I, 20: 20, gives the diameter
of the earth as 80,000 stades, which might, if converted into
Arabic miles, be approximately the 6857 miles of Leardo. According
to Macrobius the radius of the sun’s orbit is 4,800,000
stades (ibid., I, 20: 21); the diameter of the sun’s orbit would
therefore be 9,600,000 stades, or 120 times that of the earth. The
diameter of the sun’s orbit according to Leardo is 218 times that
of the earth. On the authority of Porphyry, Macrobius (ibid.,
II, 3: 14) gives the relative distances between the planets; but
Leardo’s figures bear no relation to these. I have not been able
as yet to trace the origin of Leardo’s figures.
[8]H. Grotefend, Zeitrechnung des deutschen Mittelalters und der
Neuzeit, Vol. 1, Hannover, 1891, p. 203 (reference kindly suggested
by Dom Hugh G. Bévenot of Weingarten Abbey, Württemberg,
Germany).
[9]Grotefend, op. cit., p. 113, asserts that O was usually omitted
to avoid confusion with zero. Leardo, however, includes O.
J and I are counted as one letter. The golden number of 1453 is
10; Leardo’s A corresponds with golden number 8.
26
[10]The following is a comparison of the times of the new moon
on certain dates as indicated by Leardo with the actual times as
determined for the meridian of Venice from Th. von Oppolzer,
Canon der Finsternisse (constituting Denkschr. Kaiserl. Akad. der
Wiss. in Wien, Math.-naturw. Classe, Vol. 52, 1887).

Leardo’s Times Actual Times
1453 Dec. 1 ? hrs. 203? pts. Nov. 30 2.40 P. M.
1455 Apr. 16 21 hrs. ? Apr. 17 12.22 A. M.
1456 Apr. 6 7 hrs. 229 pts. Apr. 5 4.25 A. M.
1461 Jan. 11 21 hrs. ? Jan. 11 8.44 P. M.
1468 Feb. 23 14 hrs. 747 pts. Feb. 23 10.15 P. M.

The discrepancies are too great and too variable to enable us to
come to any very definite conclusions as to the place or manner of
origin of Leardo’s figures.
[11]The division of the hour into 1080 points (3×6×60, as
Dom Bévenot points out) is puzzling. More usually the hour
was subdivided into four points. See Grotefend, op. cit., p. 188.
[12]The dominical letter for 1453 was G.
[13]On the basis of certain of the figures given by Leardo for the
lengths of the days at about the times of the solstices, I have estimated
that this table was worked out for about lat. 42° 45′ N,
which is more nearly the latitude of Orvieto than that of Venice
(45° 30′). (This calculation was made with the Smithsonian
Meteorological Tables, 4th edit. (constituting Smithsonian Misc.
Colls., Vol. 69, No. 1), Washington, 1918: Table 87, “Duration
of Sunshine at Different Latitudes,” and Table 88, “Declination
of the Sun for the Year 1899.” The difference in the declination
of the sun for 1452 and 1899 is negligible.) Dom Bévenot writes:
“I fancy day lengths were reckoned roughly for degrees. Here
in Weingarten about 1490 they used tables drawn up for lat.
45° N, though the place is actually 47° 40′.”
27
[14]I am indebted to Dom Bévenot for the following comment:
“Concerning the calendar of saints I find the good Venetian has
inserted besides the usual feast of St. Mark, patron of Venice, on
April 25 two more: that of his apparition and the finding of his
relics on June 25 and a third feast on Jan. 31 (translation). The
last two were special for the diocese of Venice (Aquileia). The
calendar for Aquileia is given at the beginning of Grotefend,
op. cit., Vol. 1, but does not quite tally with Leardo’s list of saints.
Perhaps this is because Grotefend has modernized the calendar.
It may be that Leardo, living perhaps elsewhere than in Venice or
its diocese, put in feasts that were dear to him. Indeed, in view
of your findings for latitude from the length of the days
[see
preceding note], Rome is the most likely place, perhaps, for the Venetian
embassy. It lies nearly in lat. 42° N; if we allow for Leardo
measuring the length of the days according to the apparent sunset
and sunrise, this may well explain a discrepancy of the greater
part of a degree.”
[15]Berchet, op. cit., p. 7.
[16]See H. F. Lutz, Geographical Studies Among Babylonians
and Egyptians, in Amer. Anthropologist, Vol. 26 (N.S.), 1924,
pp. 160-174.
[17]See Appendix, Nos. 305, 619.
[18]Kretschmer, CE see p. 63.
[19]Particularly the famous Catalan Atlas of 1375 see p. 63.
[20]For the names of and for bibliographical references relating to
some of these maps see the list of references on pp. 63-67, sub
CD, Mauro, Piz., Vat., Vilad.
[21]This Latin translation of Ptolemy’s Geography was begun by
the Byzantine scholar Emmanuel Chrysoloras and completed by
Jacopus Angelus in 1410; manuscripts of this translation were
accompanied by maps, which, however, differ from the well-known
maps in the Ptolemaic atlases of the late fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. The latter were the work of Dominus Nicolaus Germanus,
known as Nicholas Donis. See A. E. Nordenskiöld,
Facsimile Atlas to the Early History of Cartography, transl. by
J. A. Ekelöf and Clements R. Markham, Stockholm, 1889, pp. 9-10.
28
[22]Like the Leardo map of 1452, the map of Walsperger, 1448,
reveals Ptolemaic influence in some of its names although all the
topographical features are strictly medieval. The Genoese world
map of 1447 in its elliptical form is the result of a more serious
attempt to reconcile the Ptolemaic geography with the traditional
views. See Kretschmer, CE, pp. 76-77; on the Walsperger
map, Kretschmer, Eine neue mittelalterliche Weltkarte der
vatikanischen Bibliothek, in Zeitschr. Gesell. für Erdkunde zu
Berlin, Vol. 26, 1891, pp. 371-406, reference on pp. 376-377.
On the Genoese world map see the extended commentary of
Fischer, op. cit., pp. 155-206.
[23]Kret., CE pp. 82-83.
[24]See Kret., Port., pp. 81-93; see also E. L. Stevenson, Portolan
Charts: Their Origin and Characteristics, with a Descriptive List of
those Belonging to the Hispanic Society of America, New York,
1911, p. 19, where it is suggested that the faulty orientation of the
Mediterranean may be in part connected with the persistence
since the time of Ptolemy of the practice of placing Constantinople
on maps “too far to the north by at least two degrees.”
31
APPENDIX
DETAILED COMMENTS ON THE MAP
Explanation
The following commentary is divided into sections numbered
with Roman numerals corresponding to the Roman numerals on
the general key map (Fig. 4, at end of book). Each item is
given an Arabic numeral which corresponds to the Arabic
numerals on the detailed key maps (Figs. 5-10, at end of book).
For each feature which bears a place name and for each longer
legend on the Leardo map the transcription is given below in italic.
Many of these transcriptions, particularly of names written on
edifices (castles, churches, etc.), are mere guesses, owing to the
obscurity of the original. Particular difficulty was encountered
in distinguishing between the letters a, e, o, c, and t, and between
s and f. A clue to the reading of many names, however, was
furnished by other maps contemporary with or earlier than that
of Leardo. Illegible letters are indicated by dots; doubtful
readings by (?); interpolated letters are enclosed in square
brackets. Illeg. means “wholly illegible.”
No data beside the transcriptions are given for such names as
f. tigris, corsicha, galizia, etc., the meaning of which is obvious.
In the case of the less familiar names, the forms in which they
appear on certain other medieval maps are supplied. In general,
if a name occurs on the Catalan Atlas of 1375 (CA), on the Catalan
map in the Este Library at Modena (CE), or on the Ptolemaic
maps (Ptol.), no attempt is made to indicate its occurrence
elsewhere.
Each doubtful identification with a medieval name is preceded
by ?. For names along the coast of the Mediterranean, the Black
Sea, and the Atlantic, references are given to the pages in
Kretschmer’s Die italienischen Portolane des Mittelalters (= Kret.,
Port.) where the variant spellings of these names as they are
found in the more important portolans and portolan charts are
listed and the places identified with modern localities.
32
Identifications with modern localities are indicated by =, or =mod.;
with well-known ancient localities by =anct. Suggested
but doubtful identifications are preceded by =?, and names for
which I have been unable to find or to suggest any identification
with a modern locality are indicated by =? standing alone.
With the identification of Ptolemaic and medieval names in
the Far East, in Africa, and in Scandinavia, we enter upon a
hazardous and controversial field. While in many instances I
have indicated identifications that have been made by competent
scholars, needless to say, these should not be accepted as final.
One cannot but feel that where an identification is based upon
mere similarity in sound it is often a case of one man’s guess being
as good as another’s. The scope and purpose of the present
study does not permit of an exhaustive examination of these
questions of detail.
For more complete bibliographical data relating to publications
referred to in abbreviated form in the key and for an explanation
of the abbreviations, see pp. 63-67. In bibliographical
references volume numbers are indicated in lower case Roman,
book numbers in upper case Roman, and chapter and page
numbers in Arabic type.

On the key maps where there are long rows of place names the
first and last numbers only are indicated, with an arrow connecting
them. This is done to avoid overcrowding.
The Arabic numerals are in general placed in positions corresponding
to those of the legends on the original. This leads
in some instances to the separation of the numbers from the
symbols to which they relate (e.g., 73).
I. Northern Asia
Mountains
1 Mo. alani: Alani Montes in Scythia intra Imaum Montem,
NE of Caspian Sea, Ptol. (VI, 14: 3 (FA 22));=Mugodzhar hills
in the Kirghiz steppes, a southern continuation of the Ural Mountains (PW, i, 1281).
33
2 Mo. ripei: Rhipaei Montes, in which the
Don rises, between Sea of Azof and Baltic, Ptol. (III, 5:15
(FA 17)). See also 596 and PW, 2nd ser., i, 902-904.
3 Mo. norosus: Norossus Mons, NE of Caspian Sea, Ptol. (VI,
14:5 (FA 22)).
4 Mo. gaspio: Caspii Montes, between Greater
Armenia and Media, Ptol. (V, 13:3 (FA20)); transferred to the
far northeast as the haunt of Gog and Magog on medieval maps,
including CA and CE. See Kret., CE, 202-206.
Rivers
5 f. Tanai: Tanais Fluvius, Ptol. (V, 9:1, etc. (FA17));=Don.
6 f. rumus: ?Rhymmus Fluvius, which enters the Caspian E of
the Rha (Volga), Ptol. (VI, 14:2, 4 (FA22));=Volga.
7 f. ras: Rha Fluvius, Ptol. (V, 9:12, etc. (FA22)); see PW, 2nd ser., i,
1-8;=upper Volga.
8 Unnamed eastern tributary of the Ras;=Kama or Viatka.
Other Natural Features
9 zizera: Zizera, shown as an island on CD and CA;=the
jazira or island of Peskov in the Volga near Tsaritsin (Yule,
Cath., i, 308); Hamy (395) suggests Sizran.
10 dixerto de zornade
| trenta (desert of thirty days). Marco Polo’s desert of Lop, said
to take one month to cross (Polo, i, 196); a long inscription on CA
in the same locality describes this desert and the devils’ voices
heard in it. See 33.
11 On this gulf as it is shown on CE appears
the legend: “On these islands there are many beautiful
griffons and falcons, and the inhabitants of the islands do not
venture to seize them without the permission of the Grand Khan,
lord of the Tatars” (Kret., CE, 208; from Polo, i, 270).
Edifices
(A) North of the River Ras and its Eastern Tributary
12 zimachi|a(?): ?Sarmatia;=Russia. See also 600.
13 Tomb of the Grand Khan, beneath which an inscription reads
thus: q ... li sie El sepulchro del | [gran can] et fano questa | ...
che quando El uen | portato a sepelir El uen acom|pagniato da
34
molti homeni | armadi Iquali ozideno queli(?) | Itrouano su le
strade et | dicono che le anime de coloro sono Benede|te per che Le
aconpa|gniano Lanima del gran | can aunaltra uita. Similar
inscription in corresponding position on CE (209-210) from Polo
(i, 246, 250-251).
14 Ro. de mas ... (?): ?Moscaor, CD;=Moscow
(Hamy, 394).
15 cast. | ra.(?): ?Castrama, CA; Castrema,
CE;=Kostroma (Hamy, 395).
16 ezina(?): ?duplicate of 18.
17 alla ... (?): ?Allania, N of Black Sea, CA;=country
of the Alans (Hallb., 13, 14). See also 604.
18 etzi|na: Polo (i,
223-225); Cordier (Ser M. P., 53-55) places Polo’s Etzina in SW
Mongolia, “on the river Hei-shui, called Etsina [=Etsin Gol] by
the Mongols.” See also 16.
(B) Between the Rivers Ras, Rumus, and Tanai
19 trachia: Torachi, CA;=Torjok (Hamy, 395).
20 tufer: Tifer, CA;=Tver, capital of an important Russian principality
and seat of a bishop in the Middle Ages.
21 botnia(?):=?Bothnia; ?duplicate of 608.
22 zitere|ae(?): ?[Ar]çetreca, Vat.;=Astrakhan
(Pullé, Vat., 8).
23 racoba(?): =?
(C) South Side of East Branch of River Rumus
24 borga: Borgar, CA; Bolgara, Polo (i, 4, 6-8);=med. Bolghar,
on the Volga 90 m. below Kazan (Yule, Polo, i, 7).
25 Iornâ: Ioram, CA;=?Churmansk (Shurminsk) on the Viatka (Yule,
Cath., i, 307).
26 paschati(?): Pascherti, CA;=Bashkir. See Hallb., 69-70; Yule, Polo, ii, 492.
27 fasa(?): Fachatim, CA; =?Viatka (Yule, Cath., i, 307).
28 sebur(?): Sebur, CA;=?Sibir,
Siberia. See Hallb., 465-466; Yule, Cath., i, 307.
(D) North and Northeast of Mt. Gaspio
29 Marm|orea: Marmorea, CA;=? See Yule, Cath., i, 308.
30 la ... |te(?):=?
31 fugur(?): Sugur, CA. See Hallb., 489;=?
32 zin.. |lel(?): Cigicalas, CA; ?Province of
Chingintalas, Polo, (i, 212-213);=?region between Lake Baikal
and Kamul (Yule, Polo, i, 214-215; Cordier, Ser M. P., 51-52).
33 Lop: On CA Ciutat de Lop N of Lake Yssicol; also a long
35
legend (from Polo, i, 196-197) describing Lop as a city where
travelers rest themselves and their beasts and supply themselves
with provisions before crossing the desert. See Hallb., 316-318;=vicinity
of Lob Nor between Chinese Turkestan and the Gobi.
See also 10.
34 findaz|ion: ?Sindachu, Polo (i, 285); Sinacius,
CA;=modern Hsüan-hua, not far from Kalgan on the Great Wall
(Yule, Polo, i, 295).
(E) Row West and South of the Gulf of the Three Islands
35 canp|iton: Campicion, Polo (Pauthier’s edit., i, 165);
Campichu, Polo (Yule’s edit., i, 219); Campicion=Chancjo of
CA (Cordier, CA, 35);=?Kan-chou in Kan-su (Yule, Polo, i,
220; Pauthier, l. c.; Cordier, l. c.; see also Hallb., 107).
36 sia ... r(?):?Siacur, CA;=?
37 tand|uc: Tanduch, CA; Tanduc
or Tenduc was the name of a plain, a province, and a city belonging
to Prester John; in the province was the country of Gog and
Magog (Polo, i, 240, 284);=? See Yule, Polo, i, 285-288; Paul
Pelliot in Journ. Asiatique, May-June, 1922, pp. 595-596.
38 suchc|hur(?): ?Sukchur in Tangut, Polo (i, 217);=Su-chou in
Kan-su (Yule, Polo, i, 218).
39 rabo|.ibi(?):=?
40 tign|infor:
?Chingianfu, Polo (ii, 176-177);=Chinkiang-fu (Yule, Polo, ii, 177-178).
Legend Between Rivers Ras and Tanai
41 Idolatri: On CE a legend applying to city of Castrema (see
15) explains that idolaters there worship a metal idol without head
or hands (Kret., CE, 210).
II. Far Eastern Asia
The surface of the map northwest of the Terrestrial Paradise
has been rubbed in such a way that many of the names are illegible.
Mountains
The mountain system here corresponds essentially with that of
CE; Ptolemaic names have been given to mountains and rivers.
42 sa ... s(?):=?
43 Mo. osmire(?): Asmiraei Montes in
36
Serica, Ptol. (VI, 16: 2 (FA23));=?eastern end of T‘ien Shan
with the small low hill chains to the south (PW, ii, 1702).
44 Mo. Tagurus: Tagurus Mons in Serica
(Θάγουρον ὄρος),
Ptol., l. c.
45 Mo. otorocoras: Ottorocoras Mons in Serica (ibid.).
46 Mo.
semantinus: Semanthini Montes in India intra Gangem, Ptol.
(VII, 2:8 (FA26));=?coast range of Annam (PW, iv, 2050;
see also Gerini, 376).
47 Mo. anibi: Annibi Montes, Ptol. (VI,
16:2 (FA23));=?eastern T‘ien Shan above Qara Shar and Turfan (PW, i, 2258).
48 Mo. Tanacomedo: ?[Mon-]Tana Comedo
[rum] (ἣ ὀρεινὴ Κωμηδών) in Sogdiana, Ptol. (VI, 12: 3 (FA22)).
Rivers
No rivers are shown in this region on either CA or CE;
Leardo was evidently impelled to add them by the study of
Ptolemy’s Geography.
49 f. ocardis: Oechardes Fl. of Serica, Ptol. (VI, 16: 3 (FA23)).
50 f...(?)=?
51 f. danas: Demus Fl. of Sogdiana, a branch
of the Jaxartes (see 117), Ptol. (VI, 12: 3 (FA22)).
52 f. bascatis: Bascatis Fl. of Sogdiana, also a branch of the Jaxartes (ibid.).
Lake
53 Illeg.: Lacus Issicol, Leardo, 1448; Yssicol, CA;=?either
Lake Balkash or Issiq Köl (Hallb., 563-564).
Edifices
(A) Northwest of the Terrestrial Paradise
54 sachai: ?Sacae, Ptol. (VI, 13 (FA22)).
55 s ... de | iaca(?): =?
56-62 All illeg.
63 PARADIXO TERESTO: The Terrestrial
Paradise is placed in Africa on the earlier Leardo maps as
well as on CE. See Wright, Lore, 261-263.
(B) West of Terrestrial Paradise
64 sina: ?Sinae, Ptol. (VII, 3 (FA26));=China (see Wright,
op. cit., 271).
65 Ro de ...|.ge(?): =?
66 Tango | ... ti(?):
?Tangut, Polo (i, 203-205);=Kansu and southern Mongolia
(Hallb., 507-508).
67 Ro Tarse: CA and CE have legends to the
37
effect that from Tarsia came the three Magi (Kret., CE, 197-198;
Hallb., 515-517, 267-268);=vicinity of the T‘ien Shan (Hallb.,
l.c.);=eastern Turkestan (Kret., l.c.).
Place Names
68 pinca(?): ?Pinzu, Mauro (Zurla, 36; name omitted on Santarem’s
copy of Mauro map in his Atlas, 45); ?Piju, Polo (ii,
141; see Hallb., 409);=P‘ei-chou (Yule, Polo, l.c.).
69 ruoenci(?):=?
Longer Inscriptions
70 prouinzia de og magog doue | foron(?) serati molti Trib ...
de | Judei (province of Gog and Magog where many tribes of Jews
were enclosed): Related legends on CA (Buchon and Tastu, 145-146)
and CE (Kret., CE, 202-206); see Hallb., 260-265. On
legend of Gog and Magog see also Wright, Lore, 287-288.
71 Idolatri: A reflection of the idolaters of the Grand Khan’s domains
frequently mentioned by Marco Polo.
72 porte de fero: The iron gates erected by Alexander the Great to enclose Gog and
Magog, shown on CE; see 70.
73 statoe de alesandro: The statues
of trumpeters set up by Alexander to keep guard over Gog and
Magog, shown on CA and CE; see 70.
74 dixerto doue eno | molti grifoni:
Griffons were placed in Scythia by many classical
and medieval writers; see Hallb., 232-234.
75 qu ... si manza | carne de omo
(here they eat the flesh of man); Cannibals were
placed in these regions by many classical and medieval writers;
they were often associated with Gog and Magog; see Hallb., 30-32.
III. India
Mountain
76 Mo. meandrus: Maeandrus Mons in Farther India, Ptol.
(VII, 2:8 (FA26));=?Mahudaung mountains in Upper Burma
(Gerini, 51, 832). No corresponding mountain shown on either
CA or CE.
Rivers
The river system is more elaborate than, although somewhat
analogous in its general pattern to, that of CA and CE. The
38
Indus and its branches seem to be lacking on the Catalan maps.
I am unable to trace the origin of several of the river names.
77 f. priolada:=?
78 f. tindarus:=?
79 f. masa|rus:=?
80 f. sumas:=?
81 f. bindas: Bindas Fl. of India intra Gangem
Fluvium (Ptol., VII, 1, 6 (FA25)); possibly the name is related to
that of Bhiwandi near Bassein, N of Bombay (Tomaschek, in PW,
iii, 268-269).
82 f. madus: Namadus Fl. of India intra Gangem
Fluvium, Ptol. (VII, 1:5 (FA25)).
83 f. amarus: Amarus is
given as another name for the Indus on Vat. (Pullé, Vat., 16-17);
no Amarus Fl. in Ptol.
84 f. Indicus: The course of the Indus as
Leardo draws it is derived from Ptol. (VII, 1:2 (FA25)).
Edifices
85 predon | corcon(?): =?
86 terisin|ti(?): =?
87 zatin(?): ?Zayton, CA; Zaytom, CE; Zayton, Polo (ii, 234-237), an important
medieval Chinese seaport;=? See Yule, Polo, ii, 237-242;
Cordier, CA, 48-49.
88 cansai(?): Ciutat de Cansay, CA;
Kinsay, Polo (ii, 185-193, 200-208, 215-216);=Hangchow (Yule,
Polo, ii, 193; Cordier, CA, 41-42).
89 India.
90 Ro de col|onbi: Pruuinesa Columbo, CA;
Coilum, Polo (ii, 375-376); see
Hallb., 153-156;=Quilon (Yule, Polo, ii, 377-380).
91 balesan: Balaxan (Polo, Ramusio’s edit., 1583, according to Hallb., 62);
Cjutat de Baldassia, CA; Baldacia, CE;=Badakshan (see Yule,
Polo, i, 157-163).
92 taseta: ?Rey del Tauris, CA; Rey Tauris,
CE;=Tabriz (Hallb., 518-522).
Place Names on Coast
93 penta: Penta, next place E of Bangala, CA; Pentam, an
island, Polo (ii, 280); see also Hallb., 411-413;=Bintan (Yule,
Polo, ii, 280);=“the Be-Tumah (Island) of the Arab Navigators,
the Tamasak Island of the Malays; and, in short, the Singapore
Island of our day” (G. E. Gerini, in Journ. Royal Asiatic Soc.,
July, 1905, p. 509; see also Cordier, Ser M. P., 105); Gerini,
740, suggests that Penta of CA “might have been the historical
continuation of the Ptolemaic” Pentapolis (Ptol., VII, 2:2),
which he places near the mouth of the Chittagong, at the head of
39
the Bay of Bengal.
94 taine: ‘cjutat de cayna | acj finis catayo,’
CA; see Cordier, CA, 39.
95 bangala: Bangala, CA; Polo (ii, 98-99);=Bengal.
96 ianpa: Janpa, CA; Chamba, Polo (ii,
266-268); see Hallb., 173-174;=Annamite coast (Cordier, in
Yule, Polo, ii, 270);=C‘ha-ban, the ancient Cham capital (Gerini, 240).
97 ligo: Lingo, CA; ?Locac, Polo (ii, 276) (this identification
suggested by Pullé, CE, 46);=?Siam, Borneo, or Malay
Peninsula (see Yule, Polo, ii, 277-280; Hallb., 486; Cordier, Ser M. P., 104-105).
98 macabin: ?Mahabar, Mauro; Maabar, Polo (ii. 331-332);=Coromandel Coast (Hallb., 320-323).
99 gr ... (?): =?
100 darsi: =?
101 caruzia: =?
102 butifilli: Butifilis, CA; Mutfili, Polo (ii, 362);=Motupalli (Yule, Polo., ii, 362).
103 caclur(?): =?
104 coluto: =Quilon (see also 90).
105 cormos: ?Hormuz (see 158) misplaced: “The c is constantly substituted
for an aspirate by the Italian travellers (e.g. Polo’s Cormos for
Hormuz)” (Yule, Cath., ii, 242). See Hallb., 242-246;=Ormuz.
106 elli: Elly, CA; Ely, Polo (ii, 385-386);=Mt. D’Eli or Delly
(Yule, Cath., iv, 74-75).
107 maganor: Manganor, CA;=Mangalore (Yule, Cath. iv, 73).
108 diegei: Diogil in interior of India,
CA;=Deogiri, med. name of Daulatabad (see Yule, Cath. i, 310; iv, 21).
109 cora: ?Cory Promontorium, Ptol. (VII, 1:11(FA25));=Cape
Calymere (E. H. Bunbury, A History of Ancient Geography
(2 vols., London, 1879), ii, 474).
110 pez.mor(?): Pescamor,
CA;=“perhaps Barçelor” (Yule, Cath., i, 309; iv, 73).
111 zitabor: Chintabor, CA;=St. John’s Point (Yule, Cath., i, 309; iv, 64-65).
112 parzinar(?): Paychinor, CA;=Barkur (Yule, Cath., i. 309; iv, 73).
Longer Inscriptions
113 qui predico | san Tom|axo (here preached St. Thomas):
On the traditions regarding St. Thomas in India see Yule, Polo,
ii. 353-359; Wright, Lore, 74, 272, 275, 279.
114 qui nase|le
noxe | dindia (here grow the nuts of India): In the Ramusian
version of Polo (ii, 354) occurs the following statement in connection
with the shrine of St. Thomas: “The Christians who have
charge of the church have a great number of Indian Nut trees,
whereby they get their living.”
115 India dixer|ta.
40
IV. Central Asia
Mountain
116 Mo. caropanus: Paropanisus Mons, Ptol. (VI, 11:5, etc.
(FA25));=Hindu Kush (Hallb., 393). See also 123.
Rivers
117 f. Ixartes: Jaxartis Fl., Ptol. (VI, 12:1, etc. (FA22)); shown
but not named on CE; Flum d’Organçi, CA; see Hallb., 280-281.
On ancient and medieval knowledge of the Aral Sea, into which
the Jaxartes flows, see W. Barthold, Aral, in Encycl. of Islam,
Vol. 1, Leiden and London, 1913, pp. 419-420.
118 f. Oxius: Oxus Fl., Ptol. (VI, 9:1, etc. (FA22)); ?Flum Amo, CA; not
shown on CE; see Hallb., 24-26.
119 f. rius: Areios or Arius Fl., Ptol. (VI, 17:2 (FA24)); see Hallb., 25, 47; PW, ii, 623;=?Hari
Rud.
Edifices
120 organa: ?Dupl. of 121.
121 organ|zia: Flum d’Organçi,
CA; see Hallb., 547-549; Yule, Cath., iii, 82;=Urganj, famous
medieval city of Khorasmia on the lower Oxus.
122 sagom|oa(?):=?Samarkand (see Hallb., 445-448).
Place Names
123 paraponixa; Paropanisades, Ptol. (VI, 18, etc. (FA24));=northern
Afghanistan (Besnier, 573). See also 116.
124
archuxia: Arachosia, Ptol. (VI, 20, etc. (FA24));=Afghanistan
(Besnier, 69). See Hallb., 33-34.
125 arzeglia: =? See 129.
126
dragiana: Drangiana, Ptol. (VI, 19, etc. (FA24));=Seistan (Hallb., 192).
127 margana: Margiana, Ptol. (VI, 10, etc.
(FA22));=environs of modern Merv (Besnier, 464).
128 archuxia: Dupl. of 124.
129 arzegia: Dupl. of 125.
130 mesagit: Massagitae, Ptol. (VI, 10:2 (FA22)); a people of Scythia mentioned
also by Pliny, Solinus, etc. (Hallb., 339-340).
131 bocasan: ?Bocar, CA;=Bukhara (Hallb., 79-80).
132 orcania:
Probably a repetition of 120 and 121; might, however, be Hyrcania,
Ptol. (VI, 9 (FA22)); see Hallb., 253-254;=part of Mazanderan (Besnier, 376).
41
133 samaria:=?Samarcand (see 122);
Hallb., 448, suggests Samaria in Palestine misplaced, but adds:
“pourtant la chose n’est pas probable.”
134 zagaspia: Zaraspa,
CA; Zariaspa or Zarispa in Bactriana, Ptol. (VI, 11:7 (FA22));=Balkh
(Besnier, 117). See also Kret., Walsp., 385.
135 amol: This name is applied to various towns and to a river in central
Asia on CA and Mauro. Perhaps it represents a confusion of the
name of the town of Amol in Mazanderan with that of the Amu
Daria (Oxus). See Hallb., 24-26.
136 seno: ?Sena or Sina in Margiana, Ptol. (VI, 10:3 (FA22)).
137 lidazel:=?
V. Persia
Lake and River
138, 139 Unnamed lake and river. On CA and CE the river
rises in two lakes, the eastern and western being named on CA
Mar Dargis (=Lake Van) and Mar de Marga (=Lake Urmia)
respectively (Hallb., 43-44, 337-338). On Piz. the river is Flum
Chexi; if Chexi is Khuzistan (see 164) the river possibly represents
the Karun.
Desert
140 Sarmania | dixerta: Carmania Deserta, Ptol. (VI,
6(FA20));=interior of the modern Kerman. See also 153.
Edifices
(A) South Shore of Caspian Sea
141 dise.n(?): Deystam, CA;=?Dehistan, a district of Mazanderan
(Hallb., 188).
142 mexa|ndra: Masandra, CA;=Mazanderan.
143 galen: Cap de Cilan, Cillam, Gellam, CA;=Gilan
(Hallb., 217-218).
144 aspaur(?): Achdio, CA; Asidio, CE;=?
145 godasp|i: Gudaspu, Con. (59); Codaspi, Piz.;=?
146 Turis: Rey del Tavris in central Persia, CA;=Tabriz (Hallb.,
518-522). See also 92.
(B) Interior
147 trachse: ?Dupl. of 67.
148 zarma|tia: ?Sarmatia, misplaced; see, however, 12, 600.
42
149 siria: Ciutat de Ssiras, CA; Siras, CE;=Shiraz (Hallb., 470-471).
150 parthi|a: Parthia, Ptol. (VI, 5 (FA20));=Khurasan (Hallb., 394-395)
151 Ro odmi|n(?): =?
152 Ro de persia: Persis, Ptol. (VI, 4 (FA20));=Persia.
(C) Persian Gulf Coast
153 Sarmania abitada: Carmania, Ptol. (VI, 8 (FA20));=Kerman. See also 140.
Place Names, North Coast of Persian Gulf
154 semenar: Femenat, CA; Semenat, Polo (ii, 398-399);=Somnath
(Yule, Polo, ii, 400).
155 demonela: Damonela, CA;=Daibul (Yule, Cath., i, 309).
156 chetimo: Chetimo, CA;=Kij (ibid.).
157 oncon: Nocran, CA (omitted on Choix de doc. reproduction of CA);=Makran (ibid.).
158 ormixon: Hormision, CA;=“Old Hormuz on the Continent” (ibid.). See 105.
159 traman: Creman, CA;=Kerman. See 153.
160 usu: Ussn, CA; “Husn Amarat? (see Edri., 1, 379 [this reference is
to P. A. Jaubert, Géographie d’Edrisi, traduite de l’arabe en
français (Recueil de voyages et de mémoires publié par la Société
de Géographie, Vols. 5 and 6, Paris, 1836-1840), i, 363, 390])
Any castle is Husn” (ibid.);=Essina (Lelewel, ii, 55).
161 cadome(?): =?
162 seros: Serans, CA; Sustar, Piz.;=?Siraf
(Yule, l.c.); Sustar, Mediceo;=Shushtar (ibid.);=?“rivière
Schirin” (Lelewel, l.c.).
163 ... ch ... (?): =?
164 chesi: Chesi, CA;=Khuzistan (Yule, Cath., i, 308); shown as an island
on Piz.;=“Scheich”(?Sheikh Shu‘aib Island) (La R., i, 65).
VI. Mesopotamia and Syria
Rivers and Lakes
165-168 The river system is more accurately drawn than
on CA and CE, inasmuch as the Euphrates and Tigris join
before reaching the Persian Gulf. On CA they enter the Gulf
separately; on CE the Euphrates swings around into Egypt,
entering the Nile just above Babilonia (Cairo). All three maps
show a connection between the Euphrates and Mediterranean
through the Orontes, but only Leardo makes the Jordan communicate
43
with the Euphrates. On CA and CD an island, Zizera
(see also 9), on CD said to be the site of Nineveh, is shown in the
Euphrates, but on CE and Leardo this has become a lake. On
CA the three lakes along the Jordan are labeled from N to S:
Aquaron (=Lake Hule), Mar de Gallilea (=Sea of Galilee), and
Mar Gamora (sea of Gomorrah,=Dead Sea).
165 f. tigris.
166 f. eufrates.
167 f. Jordano.
168 f ... soldi|no: =Orontes (Kret., Port., 670).
Edifices
(A) Along the Tigris
169 moxor: Moror, CA; Moxor, Dalorto map (La R., i, 64);=Mosul (ibid.).
170 apfes: Aipsa, Vat.; Suq al-Ahvaz of the Arabic
itineraries (Pullé, Vat., 13, 31, 34).
171 Inporio | asiriorum
(empire of the Assyrians); Assyria, Ptol. (VI, 1 (FA20)).
172 seruxia|na: Susiana, Ptol. (VI, 3 (FA20));=Khuzistan (Besnier, 726).
173 babilo ...(?): Babylon or Babylonia. See also 323.
(B) In Syria
174 ga ...| a(?).
175 Jeruxalem: On the placing of Jerusalem
at the center of the earth’s surface see Wright, Lore, 259-261.
176 c ...r(?): =?
Place Names
(A) In Mesopotamia
177 baldac: Ciutat de Baldach, CA;=Baghdad.
178 mexapo: =?Mesopo[tamia].
179 birzi: =?Birejik.
180 megan: ?Mogan, Jordanus of Sévérac (Jourdain Catalani de Sévérac, Mirabilia
descripta: Les merveilles de l’Asie, edit. by Henri Cordier, Paris,
1925, 93-94; Hallb., 356-357);=plain of Mugan near junction of
Araxes and Kur.
181 malaxim: Malasia, CA:=Malatia.
(B) Interior of Syria
182 alepo: =Aleppo.
183 antozia(?): =?Antioch.
(C) Syrian Coast
184 soldin: =Suweidiyeh, near ancient Seleucia (Kret., Port., 670).
185 laliza: =Latakia (ibid.).
186 tortoxa: =Tartus (ibid.).
44
187 tripoli: =Tripoli (ibid., 671).
188 zibele: =Jebeleh (ibid.).
189 baruto: =Beirut (ibid.).
190 achre: =Acre (ibid., 672).
191 gafo: =Jaffa (ibid.).
192 larixa: =El-‘Arish (ibid., 673).
VII. Arabia
Mountains
193 Mo. sinai.
194 Mo. felizis arabie: Montana Arabiae
Felicis, which, according to Ptol. (V, 17: 3; V, 19: 1 (FA19)),
divides Arabia Petraea and Arabia Deserta on the north from
Arabia Felix on the south;=Ash-Shera’ mountains (see Alois
Musil, The Northern Heǧâz, New York, 1926, 255; the same,
Arabia Deserta, New York, 1927, 502-503).
195 Mo. prionous:
Prionotus Mons on S coast of Arabia, Ptol. (VI, 7:10 (FA21));=?
Edifices
(A) On Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean
196 bazar: Bassara, CA;=Basra.
197 golfta|ta: Golfaca,
CA; Golfathan, Con. (42);=? See Jiménez de la Espada, 205.
198 Ieita (?): Jepta, CA; Egepta, Con. (42);=?
199 cabat: Cabat, CA; Con. (42); ?Calatu, Polo (ii, 449-451);=Qalhat in
‘Oman (Yule, Polo, ii, 451; Hallb., 97-98).
200 letrob(?): Ietrib, CA;=?Yathrib, the ancient name for Medina, misplaced.
201 arabia.
(B) Red Sea Coast
202 senea: Seneha, CA;=San‘a (Hallb., 468-469).
203 fidom|at: Adromant, CA;=?Hadhramaut.
204 amei: Mey, CA; =?
205 ald.|p(?): Adep, Adem, CA;=Aden (Hallb., 8-10).
206 eta|...(?): =?
207 gaida(?): Guja, CA;=?Jidda.
208 naba|tes: =Nabataeans (Besnier, 509).
209 (?) Illeg.: =?
(C) Interior
210 sabea: Arabia Sebba, CA (which gives an illustration and
legend relating to the Queen of Sheba);=Saba or Sheba.
211 La mecha: Ciutat de Mecha, with legend, CA;=Mecca.
45
Regional Names
212 Arabia | dixerta: Arabia Deserta, Ptol. (V, 19 (FA19)).
213 Arabia | petroxa: Arabia Petraea, Ptol. (V, 17 (FA19)).
VIII. Asia Minor
River
214 ff. rosso: Odoric of Pordenone, Palatine version (Yule,
Cath., ii, 102, n. 4); Pegalotti, 7 (ibid., iii, 164);=“the tributary
of the Araxes, the Kizil Chai which waters Khoi” (Cordier, in the
same, iii, 164, n. 1).
Edifice
215 Tr...(?): Troia;=Troy.
Place Names
(A) Interior
216 saustia: Sauasto, CA;=anct. Sebastea, mod. Sivas.
217 Tabaca|san: =?
218 suilia (?): =?
219 sis: Scisia, CA;=Sis.
220 almesia: =Amasia.
221 laranda: =anct. Laranda, mod. Karaman.
222 anguri(?): =Angora.
223 aladachia: =anct. Laodicea Combusta, mod. Ladik.
224 filadelfi|a: =anct. Philadelphia, mod. Ala Shehr.
225 castamena: =Kastamuni.
226 congre: =Changri.
227 achrioteri(?): =?Ak Shehr.
228 Jachrie(?): =?
229 Janisari: =Yeni Shehr.
230 cariacasar: =?Afiun Qarahisar.
231 nicomidia.
232 bursa: =Brusa.
233 lizia: =anct. Lycia.
234 perga|mo: =anct. Pergamum.
235 licn|ia(?): =?anct. Lycaonia, misplaced.
(B) Black Sea Coast
236 Tripoli: =Tireboli (Kret., Port., 648).
237 cirisonda: =Kiresün (ibid.).
238 lauatiza: Lauona, CA;=Vona Bay (ibid.).
239 simiso: =Samsun (ibid.).
240 sinopi: =anct. Sinope, mod. Sinob. (ibid.).
241 do..s..l..(?): Docastelli (ibid., 650);=Kidros (ibid.).
242 borli: =?Boli (which, however, is in the interior).
243 samastro: =Amasra (ibid.).
244 chio: Thio, CA;=anct. Thios Prom. (ibid.).
245 punta rachia: =anct. Heraclea Pontica, mod. Bender Ergli (ibid.).
46
246 algiro: =Anadoli Kawak (ibid.).
(C) Aegean coast
247 lesm|ire: =Smyrna (ibid., 653).
IX. Armenia, Caucasia, and Southeastern Russia
Mountain
248 Mt. Ararat is labeled larche de noe.
Rivers
249 A river connecting the Sea of Azof with the Caspian is
shown on CA and CE, but without the branches reaching the
Black Sea; on Piz. this river is named Flm’ Cicopo (the Cicopa of
CA and other portolan maps being a north branch of the Kuban
delta; Kret., Port., 646);=Kuban River (ibid.).
Caspian Sea
250 Mare de Abachu(?) (Sea of Baku): Mar de Sarra e de Bacu,
CA; Mar de Sala e de Bacu, CE.
Edifices
(A) West Coast of the Caspian Sea
251 Illeg.: =?
252 famach|i: Siamachi, Vat. (Pullé, 9);=?Shemakha
(ibid., 8, n. 4).
253 baram|achi: Barmachu, CA;=?
254 abachu: Bacu, CA;=Baku.
(B) Between the Black and Caspian Seas
255 porte | deuee(?): ?Porte de Fer (see 72 and Hallb., 414).
256 armin|ia.
257 armin|ia: Dupl. of 256.
(C) Coasts of Sea of Azof and Black Sea
258 ..na(?): =?Tana, important medieval commercial city at
mouth of the Don;=mod. Azof (Kret., Port., 645; Hallb., 503-504).
259 trab|exon|da: =Trebizond (Kret., Port., 648).
Place Names in Southeastern Russia
260 seuastopoli: =anct. and med. Sebastopolis on coast of
Abkhasia (Kret., Port., 647).
261 auogaxi: =Abkhasia (ibid., 646).
47
262 mengreli: Mingrelians or Mingrelia (ibid., 647).
263 zichia: =“regional name of Circassia” (ibid., 646).
264 copa: =Copa (ibid.).
265 matraca: =Matrega, Genoese trading town on Taiman Peninsula (ibid.).
X. Indian Ocean, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea
266 Ma....dicho: Mare Indicho.
267 Mare de persia.
268 M.......: Mare rosso.
269 ... Taprobana: Trapobana, CA, CE; the Taprobane of the ancient geographers was
Ceylon; in the Middle Ages the name was probably applied to
Sumatra (Cordier, CA, 57-58; Kret., CE, 107; for suggested
identifications of places shown in Trapobana on CA see Gerini, 646-647).
270 famda|bo(?): ?Regio Femarum (for Feminarum)
on island of Iana, CA, which is perhaps a reflection of Polo’s story
of the Male and Female Islands (ii, 404-405); see also Gerini, 647, n. 2.
271 Illeg.: =?
272 m...(?): ?Malao, on both Trapobana and Iana, CA; Mallao, on Jaua, CE:=?.
273 leuia: Leroa, on Trapobana, CA;=?
274 y. caina: Caynam, CA, CE;=?Andaman Islands (Buchon and Tastu, p. 137).
275 ixole doue na[se] p | et altre spe[z] ie
(islands where pepper and other spices are produced): Legend on CA runs: “In
the sea of the Indies are 7548 islands of which we cannot enumerate here the
marvelous riches, not only in gold and silver but also in spices and
precious stones”; from Polo (ii, 264), who also, like Leardo,
mentions pepper.
276 ya de ceridus: Ceredim, CE; ?Serendib, Arabic name for Ceylon.
277 y ..corto(?): ?Setrocha, CE;=?Socotra.
278 Nameless island, corresponds in shape and position
to the Iana of CA and Jaua of CE;=Java (Cordier, CA, p.
61);=Sumatra (Gerini, p. 834).
279 Legends on this island illegible; it is, however, similar in shape to Salam or Silan of CE;=?Ceylon.
280 Illeg.: =?
281 y .. siliraoil(?): =?
XI. Southern Africa
Mountains
282 Mo elefans: Elephas Mons on the east coast of Africa,
Ptol. (IV, 7:10 (FA15));=Ras el-Fil (Vivien de St. Martin, 288).
48
283 Monti doue se caua m ... ro [molto oro, Leardo,
1448] (mountain where much gold is mined): Pliny (Nat. hist.,
VI, 189) mentions the abundance of gold in Ethiopia between
Napata and the Red Sea.
Edifices
(A) South Shore of the Red Sea
284 gobari: Zobar or Gobar, Leardo, 1448;=?Zanzibar (Santarem, iii, 437).
285 uigie: ?Vuigie, in interior of Prester John’s realm, Mauro;=?
286 tobo|let(?): =?
287 scuendn(?): Stuendi, Mauro;=?Suakin.
288 traged|it(?): Tragoditi, Mauro;
Troglodytica Regio, in East Africa, Ptol. (IV, 7: 27 (FA 15));=country
along W coast of Red Sea between Egypt and Abyssinia
(Vivien de St. Martin, 471-474).
289 satoris(?): Catoris, Mauro;=?
290 basag .. |r(?): =?
(B) Eastern “Horn” of Africa
291 acoan: Aicoum de Afra, Leardo, 1448 (Santarem, iii, 437);
Hascum, Mauro;=?Axum in Abyssinia (La R., ii, 115).
292 safola: Sofrala, Mauro;=?Sofala.
293 medi|fola: =?—294
prouinzie | dofir: P. Davaro, Mauro;=?Dawaro in Abyssinia (La
R., ii, 113, 132).
295 gfen|uj(?): =?
296 flmodo(?): =?
297 dela .. (?): =?
(C) Central Region
298 milua|s(?): =?
299 Inperio del | presto Jani (Empire of
Prester John): Prester John is shown in this part of Africa on CA
and CE. On the origins of the legend of Prester John and on the
transference of the realm of this mythical potentate from Asia to
Africa in popular tradition see Kret., CE, 99-101; Wright, Lore,
283-286.
300 ta . . . |n(?): =?
301 grafai: =?
302 fe . . .(?): =?
303 mesa: Con. (36) says that Prester John always
resides at Malsa (Jiménez de la Espada, 222; La R., i, 61).
304 carap(?): =?
Longer Legends
305 DIXERTO DEXABITADO PER CALDO (desert uninhabited
on account of heat): Leardo, 1448, Walsperger, 1448, and
Borgia, 1452, “all show a similar torrid zone, though the theory
49
was protested against by Fra Mauro, Diogo Gomez, and doubtless
by others” (A. Rainaud, Le continent austral: hypothèses et
découvertes, Paris, 1893, 199); on the development and history of
this theory see especially Rainaud, passim; also Wright, Lore, 18,
157-161.
306 dixerto.
307 qui nase homeni | che ano Il uolto | nel
petto (here are born men who have the face in the chest): Such
monsters are described by Solinus, 31,5; Isidore, Etym., XI, 3, 17;
and shown on the Hereford map (Miller, Mappaemundi, iv, 45).
XII. Middle and Lower Nile Region
Mountains
308 Mo. dimas: Mons dimas, Mauro;=?
309 Mo. libuzio: Montes Libyci, Ptol. (IV, 5: 19 (FA14));=escarpment overlooking
Nile Valley on W (PW, xiii, 148).
310 Mo. pilazi: Mons Pollaza, Mauro; ?Pylaei Montes in Ethiopia, Ptol. (IV, 7: 26
(FA15));=?
311 Mo. arazas: Arangas Mons, in Lybia Interior,
Ptol. (IV, 6: 12 (FA15));=?
Rivers and Lakes
312 f. nillo: The course of the Nile and its tributaries corresponds
essentially with that of CE (Kret., CE, 89-91; see also 338).
313 f. stapus: Astapus Fl. in Ethiopia, Ptol. (IV, 7:24
(FA15));=Bahr al-Azraq, or Blue Nile (PW, ii, 1775-1776; Besnier, 96).
Other Natural Features
314 Etiopia dezito: Ethiopian desert.
315 Libia dixerta; Deserta Libya, Ptol. (IV, 3:27 (FA13)).
316 dixerta arenoxa | qui nase animali quat|rupedi che ano Il uolto | domo (sandy
desert where are born quadruped animals which have the face of a
man): Possibly refers to the mantichora of Pliny (Nat. hist.,
VIII, 21; see Wright, Lore, 468).
317 ya. meroe: Island of Meroë, Ptol. (IV, 7 (FA15)).
Edifices
(A) West Coast of Red Sea
318 filistina: =Palestine.
319 aid . p(?): Aydip, CA;=Aidhab.
320 cidor(?): =?
321 climas: Climas, Mauro;=?
50
(B) On the Nile and Stapus
322 alesan|dria: Alexandria, CA.
323 babilonia: Babillonja, CA; Babilonia, CE;=the medieval name of Old Cairo.
324 sacon: Sohan, CA; Soan, CE;=anct. Syene, mod. Aswan.
325 bac .(?): =?
326, 327, 328, 329 Illeg.
(C) On North Shore of West African Gulf
330, 331 Illeg.
Place Name, West Coast of Red Sea
332 tes (or tos): ?Chos, CA; Con.;=?Qoseir
XIII. Upper Nile Region and West Africa
Mountains
333 Mo. Bardtion(?): Bardetus Mons in Ethiopia Interior,
Ptol. (IV, 8: 6 (FA15)).
334 Mo. Lune docho | nasitur nillo
(Mountains of the Moon from which the Nile rises): According
to a long legend on CE these mountains are called “Gibel Camar
by the Saracens, which means Mountains of the Moon in our
tongue”; they are so high that although they lie on the equator
both poles may be seen from them. The famous Mountains of
the Moon were first mentioned by Ptolemy (IV, 8: 3); see also Kret., CE. 91-92.
335 Mo. capis: Caphas Mons in Libya Interior,
Ptol. (IV, 6: 9 (FA15)); see PW, x, 1892.
336 Mo. deo ue |
chulum(?): ?Deorum Currus Mons in Libya Interior, Ptol. (IV,
6:9 (FA15)); farthest point south on W coast of Africa reached by
Hanno;=Mt. Sagres in Sierra Leone (Vivien de St. Martin, 394-396);=Cameroons
Mountain (see articles by J. de Hart in Journ.
African Soc., xxv, 1926, 264-277 (noted in Geogr. Rev., xvi,
1926, 661-662), and by R. Hennig in Geogr. Zeitschr., xxxiii,
1927, 378-392).
Island
337 ya. de prenje: ?Insula Palola, Carignano, Piz. (Fischer, 141);=?
Rivers, Lake, Seacoast
338 The upper course of the Nile with the great lake and its
tributaries rising in the Mountains of the Moon (334) corresponds
51
essentially to CE (Kret., CE, 89-91); CE, however, shows a
subterranean passage of the river W of Meroe. On ancient and
medieval theories regarding the course of the Nile, see Simar,
passim; Langenmaier, 47-48; Wright, Lore, 304-306. See also
312, 334.
339 The bay with the red, cross-shaped island is
represented on CE by an island in the delta of the West-African
river.
Desert
340 mare | arenoxe (Sandy Sea): On CE there are two legends
indicating sandy areas in West Africa (Kret., CE, 96).
Edifices
(A) North of Nile-Senegal
341 Ro doga|n .(?): ?Organa, CA; Rey dOrgana, CE;=empire
of Ghana or Kanem (La R., i, 136).
342 Ro.....(?): =?
343 almesia: Almesia, CA;=Mzab (La R., i, 136).
344 ma .. (?): =?
(B) South of Nile-Senegal
345-349 Illeg.
350 Ro m...|nel(?): =?.
351 Illeg.
Place Names
(A) Between Mt. Bardtion and the Mountains of the Moon
352 elcor(?): Probably an Arabic name with article, el;=?
353 anesa: =?
354 elundia: see 352;=?
355 dendenie: ?Dendi of Antony Malfant’s narrative of a voyage to Tuat in 1447 (La R., i,
154).
356 dris|na: =?
357 solla: Soll, CE; ?Sala, Idrisi;=?Sele,
S of Timbuktu (Miller, Arab., 162).
358 burga: Burga,
CE, a mountain in Gotonye, Con. (34);=?Burda, “mountain
region of the Sudan E of river Shari, which flows into Lake Chad,
and S of town of Kengas” (Jiménez de la Espada, 186).
359 quilan: Quilam, CE;=?
(B) North of Headwaters of the Nile
360 ganugia: ?Geugeu, CA;=Gâo (La R., i, 136).
361 geuene: Ginyia, CA; Guineua, CE;=Ghana (La R., i, 135; Kret., CE,
96-97).
362 atelas: =?
363 ansica: Anzicha, CA;=In Ziza (La R., i, 136, 138).
52
364 tablet: Tabelbelt, CA; Tibalbert, Con. (30);=Tabelbert (La R., i, 118).
365 artixe: =?
366 tocor: Tacort, CA;=Tuggurt (La R., i, 136). See also 368.
(C) Eastern Row of Names N of River Senegal
367 tutega: Tutega, Vilad.;=Tijikja (La R., i, 135).
368 tocor: Dupl. of 366.
369 udam: Sudan, CA;=Sudan (La R., i, 136).
370 tusont: =?
371 tagaza: Tagaza, CA;=Teghaza (La R., i,
136). See also 373.
372 getulla: Gaetulia, Ptol. (IV, 6: 15 (FA15));=desert region S of Morocco.
373 tagase: Dupl. of 371.
374 temenadis: Temenasin, CA;=?Tlemsen.
375 Regnio de belemon: Rex Belmarin, Bianco; “dynasty of Beni Marin which
ruled in Fez in the thirteenth century and at Tremcen [Tlemsen]
until 1407” (Simar, 295, from Santarem, iii, 368).
(D) Western Row of Names N of River Senegal
376 Fisengan: Ihsengam, Vilad.; “name now used by the negroes
to designate the sandy regions on the west bank of the
Senegal” (La R., i, 134).
377 uilodesci: This name is so much
like that of the map-maker, Mecia de Viladestes, that one is
almost tempted to believe that his signature has somehow
found its way as a place name to Leardo’s map.
378 tasu: =?
379 mascarota: Mascarota, CA; Masquarota, CE;=Tamgrut (La R., i, 137).
380 agof: =?
381 dunardin: ?Tarudant, Idrisi (Miller, Arab., 177);=?Tarudant.
382 ubêda: Ubaâduch, CA;=?
383 altamar: Alamara, CA; Zichialhamara, Con. (29);=the
Saghuiet el-Hamra in northern Rio d’Oro (La R., i, 134).
384 safinet(?): =?
XIV. North Africa
Mountains
To the mountain range of North Africa, a stock feature on
medieval maps, Leardo adds at random garbled Ptolemaic names.
385 Mo. Jouis: Dios vel Jovis Mons in Province of Africa
(Tunisia), Ptol. (IV, 3: 18 (FA13)), badly out of place;=?Jebel
Zaghwan, SW of Tunis (Müller, i, 635).
386 Mo. galcas: Zalacus
Mons in Mauretania Caesariensis (Algeria), Ptol. (IV, 2, 14
(FA12));=a part of the Lesser Atlas SW of Algiers (see Müller, i,
601).
53
387 Mo. usalatu|s: Usalaetus Mons in Province of Africa
(Tunisia), Ptol. (IV, 3:18 (FA13));=Jebel Usselet near site of
Hadrumetum (Müller, i, 635).
388 Mo. masarus: Mampsarus
Mons in Province of Africa (Tunisia), Ptol. (l. c.).
389 Mons. bur.ea(?): Buzara Mons where Mauretania Caesariensis,
the Province of Africa, and Libya Interior meet, Ptol. (IV, 2:16;
IV, 3:16 (FA13));=?Jebel bu-Kahil, S of Bu-Saada, Algeria
(PW, iii, 1094).
390 Mo flruxu(?): Phrouraesus Mons in Mauretania
Caesariensis (Algeria), Ptol. (IV, 2:16 (FA12));=?Jurjura,
SE of Algiers (Müller, i, 602).
391 Mo. garis: Garas Mons in Mauretania Caesariensis, Ptol. (l. c.).
392 Alta mons: Atlas Mons Minor on Atlantic coast of Mauretania Tingitana (Morocco),
Ptol. (IV, 1:2 (FA12)); see PW, ii, 2119.—
River
393 A river rising SW of the Atlas Mountains and entering the
western Mediterranean is shown on many fourteenth and fifteenth
century maps. On CA, instead of rising in a lake with three
tributaries, as Leardo represents it, the river encircles the city of
Sigilmessa (=Tissimi, in oasis of Tafilet, Miller, Arab., 177),
where it is entered by four tributaries from the south; a branch is
also shown entering the Atlantic. On CE the river corresponds
essentially to that of CA, except that the branch to the Atlantic
has been made the main stream and the arm leading to the
Mediterranean has been separated from that sea and converted
into a doubled-channeled tributary of the main stream.
Edifices
(A) On or Near the Mediterranean Coast
394, 395 Illeg.
396 africa(?): The Roman Province of Africa (Tunisia), Ptol. (IV, 3 (FA13)).
397 tunixi: =Tunis (Kret., Port., 679).
398 bona: =Bône (ibid., 680).
399 se ...(?): Septa of Portolan charts;=Ceuta (ibid., 683).
54
(B) Interior, Along Northern Base of Mountain Range
400 Illeg.
401 bizesta(?): ?Bichest, CA;=?Biskra.
402, 403 Illeg.
Place Names
(A) On Mediterranean Coast
404 lucha: =“A place near Cape Lukka” or Ras el-Melh (Kret., Port., 675).
405 c. bonand|rea: Cape Bonandrea of Portolan charts;=Ras el-Hillil (ibid.).
406 Illeg.
407 bnicho(?): Bernicho of Portolan charts;=anct. Berenice, mod.
Benghazi (ibid., 676).
408 Illeg.
409 licodia: =Ras el-Omja (ibid.).
410 siden: ?Sidra, CA;=island of Abu Sheifa (Bu Sceifa of Italian maps) (ibid.).
411 casero sensor: =Sensur (ibid., 677).
412 rasimabaxi: =Ras el-Makhbez (ibid.).
413 stora: =Stora (ibid., 680).
414 ancol: =Collo (ibid.).
415 zizeri: =Jijeli (ibid.).
416 buzia: =Bougie (ibid., 681).
417 titelis: =Cape Tedless (ibid.).
418 arzeia: =Arzeu (ibid., 682).
419 or.m(?): =Oran (ibid.).
420 serem: =?River Senam (ibid.).
421 om.e(?): =Honain, Cape Noe (ibid.).
422 milela: =Mellila (ibid., 683).
423 larandie: Larcudia of the Portolan charts (ibid.);=?
424 molc|mar(?): Molcemar of Portolan charts;=Alhucemas Islands (ibid.).
(B) Interior of Morocco
425 manosa: ?Manora of Portolan charts;=Mehedia (Kret., Port., 684).
426 mosa: ?Messa of Portolan charts;=?Massa (ibid., 685).
427 maran: =?
428 zemar: Zamor of Portolan charts;=Azammur (ibid., 684).
(C) Coast of Morocco
429 ninfe: Niffe of Portolan charts;=Casablanca (ibid.).
430 sofin: =Safi (ibid.).
XV. Black and Mediterranean Seas
Names of Seas
431 [Mare] mauro(?): Unnamed on CA and CE;=Black Sea.
432 [Mare] de adriano: =Adriatic Sea.
433 Mare Me[diterr]ano.
434 Mare de Leone: =Gulf of Lions.
55
Islands
435 Cip[ro]: =Cyprus.
436 rodo: =Rhodes.
437 sio: =Chios (Kret., Port., 660).
438 arcipellago.
439 negropo[nte]: =Euboea.
440 ya de chrete (?): =Crete.
441 crsicha.
442 sardignia.
443 minoricha: =Minorca.
444 Maioricha: =Majorca.
445
Illeg.
XVI. Southwestern Europe
Rivers
446 The Guadalquivir: similar course on CA and CE.
447 f. lizer: =Loire.
448 f. stequana: =Seine.
449 f. rode|nus: =Rhône.
Edifices
450 gr ... (?): =Granada.
451 Illeg.
452 span ... (?): =Spain.
453, 454 Illeg.
455 bart.|nia: =Brittany.
456 fr ... |a: =France.
457 Illeg.
458 . ugn ...(?): =?Avignon.
459 proui|..(?): =?Provence.
Place Names
(A) Atlantic Coast
460 sibilia(?): =Seville.
461 lisbo|na.
462 galizia.
463 astora: =Asturias.
464 ganti|et: =?
(B) Mediterranean Coast
465 malica: =Malaga.
466 sarauignia: =Salobrena (Kret., Port., 581).
467 al(?)meria.
467a carta.(?)enia: =Cartagena.
468 lacantera:= Alicante (ibid., 584-585).
469 denia.
470 toloxa: =Tolosa.
471 ualenza: =Valencia.
472 tortoxa: =Tortosa.
473 sale: =Salou.
474 taragona.
475 barzelona.
476 anpurie: =Ampurias.
477 coliuro: =Collioure
478 narbona.
479 monpolier: =Montpelier.
480 aquemorte: =Aigues Mortes.
Regional Name
481 guascognia: =Gascony.
56
XVII. Atlantic Ocean and Islands
482 Mare de spagnia.
483 Illeg.;=Canary Islands.
484 Ingilterra.
485 Schoz.(?): Scotia;=Scotland.
XVIII. Central Europe
Mountains
486 The Alps run due north from northern Italy.
Rivers and Lake
487 f. renus: =Rhine.
488 The Elbe, unnamed (see, however, 513); similar course on CE, CA, Bianco, and other maps.
489 f. prexant: =?
490 f. sudumr(?): Sudumera, CA;=river of
Sandomir, or Vistula (Hamy, 402).
491 lacus senire(?): ?Lacus
Alech, CD; Lacus Nerja, CA;=?Bay of Putzig (Hamy, 400).
Edifices
492-497 All illeg.
498 polana: Polonia, CA;=Poland.
499 panon|ia: =?anct. Pannonia.
500 carcou|ia(?): Cracouja, CA;=Cracow.
501 podol|.a: =Podolia.
Place Names
(A) On the Rhine
502 austrua(?): =Austria.
503 colognia.
(B) Between Rhine and Elbe and on Elbe
504 bemia: =Bohemia.
505 praga: =Prague.
506 drensna: =Dresden.
507 misen: =Meissen.
508 guse: Guise, CA;=Würtzen (Hamy, 407).
509 aquis: =?
510 mogropes: Mangobror, CA;=?Magdeburg.
511 argenimon|de: Argent Munde, CA; Tangermünde (Buchon and Tastu, 49).
512 stendar: =Stendal.
513 albia: River name made into a place name;=Elbe.
(C) Between Elbe and Baltic
514 gara gorda(?): Garagona, CA;=Glogau (Hamy, 403).
515 schlauonia: =Sclavania, the name applied to the Slavic frontier
region of Germany in the Middle Ages (Spruner-Mencke, Histor.
Atlas, Mittelalter, No. 31).
57
516 sasonia: =Saxony.
517 ludus|maior:
Ludis Magna, CA; Lundis Magna on Ptolemaic maps of
the type called Scandico-Byzantine by Nordenskiöld (Periplus,
88); Bondismaguc, Con. (7; see Jiménez de la Espada 184-185);=?Lüdershagen,
near Stralsund (Lelewel, ii, 65; Hamy, 400).
518 dazia: =Denmark.
519 prusia: =Prussia; see 523.
520 colbera: =Kolberg.
521 alec: Alech, CA;=Hela (Lelewel, ii, 65).
522 stetin.
523 pursia: Dupl. of 519.
524 godanse: Godansse, CA;=Danzig.
525 scheipe(?): Scorpe, CA;=?Stolp (Hamy, 400).
526 Sudana: Sudona, CA;=Sandecz (ibid., 402).
527 pante|nia: Prutenja, CA;=Königsberg on the Pregel (ibid., 401).
528 eue(?): =?
529 albig: Albing, CA;=Elbing (ibid., 402).
XIX. Italy
River
530 f. po.
Edifices
531 Illeg.: =?Genoa.
532 Illeg.: =?Florence.
533 Illeg.: =?Rome.
534 Illeg.: =?Naples.
535 Illeg.: Vignette represents St. Mark’s and the Campanile;=Venice.
Place Names
536 . . g . . (?): =?Reggio di Calabria.
537 cotron: =Cotrone (Kret., Port., 618).
538 taranto.
539 o[t]ranto.
540 brandizo: =Brindisi.
541 manfredonia.
542 guasto: =Vasto (ibid., 621).
543 ortona.
544 ancona.
545 fano.
546 pexara: =Pesaro.
547 rimano: =Rimini.
548 zexeno: =Cesenatico (ibid., 623).
549 rauena: =Ravenna.
550 ferara.
551 chioca: =Chioggia (ibid.).
XX. Southeastern Europe
Rivers
The river system corresponds generally with that of CA and
CE.
552 f. donoia: =Danube.
553 f. morana: =Morava.
554 f. drina: =Drin.
555 f. moree(?): =?Moldau.
556, 557, 558: Three unnamed islands in the Danube; on CA these are named:
Insula de Jaurim, Insula Buda, Insula de Sermona(?).
58
Edifices
559 bu . . .(?): =?Buda.
560 m . . l . .(?): =?
561 ongar|ia: =Hungary.
562 serui|a: =Serbia.
563 bosn|a(?): =Bosnia.
564 ulachia: =Wallachia.
565 bulga|ria.
Place Names
566 dalmazi.
567 albania.
568 modon: =Methone (Kret., Port., 635).
569 coron: =Corone (ibid.).
570 salonichi.
571 filipopoli.
572 sofia.
573 andernopolli: =Adrianople.
574 garipolli: =Gallipoli.
575 pera.
576 costantinopoli.
XXI. Baltic Sea
577 Mar de alemani: =Baltic Sea.
578 ya(?) gotlandia: =Gottland.
579 Illeg.
XXII. Scandinavia
Mountains
580 The mountain system is a simplification of that shown on CE.
Rivers
581 f. netur: Flū Nectir, CE; Fl. Vectur, CD;=Motala, outlet of Lake Vettern (Hamy, 387).
582 f. turontes: Turuntus Fl. in
Sarmatia, Ptol. (III, 5:2 (FA9));=Dvina (Müller, i, 412).
Longer Legends
583 in q[uesta par] te si caualca su zervi | tori et montoni et su
queli fano le | loro bataie (in this region they ride on deer, bulls, and
sheep, and on these they make their battles): Compare legend on
CE (Kret., CE, 214).
584 In questa parte sta zente che non uide |
Il sole 4 mexe de lano (in this region there are people who do not
see the sun for four months of the year): Santarem (iii, 409, note
2) suggests a relation between this and a passage in Jordanis, De
59
rebus Geticis (Monumenta Germaniae historica, Auctorum
antiquissimorum, Vol. 5, Part 1, Berlin, 1882, p. 58) descriptive
of the Adogitae of Scanzia, who enjoy uninterrupted sunshine for
forty days and darkness for an equal period each year (see also
Fridtjof Nansen, In Northern Mists, New York, 1911, i, 130-134).
Place Names
585 nouega: =Norway.
586 sechamor: Scamor, CD;=Skanör (Hamy, 426).
587 scarsa: Scarsa, CD:=Skaraborg (Hamy, 383).
588 zedina: ?Andine, CD, which is possibly “nundinae,”
with reference to the fairs of Skanör and Valsterbode (Hamy, 385).
589 selandia: =?Zealand, misplaced. See Nansen, Northern Mists, ii, 219.
590 suzia: Suecia, CD;=Sweden (Hamy, 383, 426).
591 stochi: Stocol, CD; Stocoll, CE;=Stockholm (Hamy, 386, 427).
592 Erma: ?Kalma, CD;=Kalmar (Hamy, 386, 427).
593 sadezeflingt(?): Suderpigel, CD; Sudechping, CE;=Söderköping (Hamy, 387, 427).
594 saglat: Asillang, CE; Assingland on fourteenth century map in Museo Borbonico,
Naples (Hamy, 427);=?
595 roder|in: Roderin, CD; CE;=Roden,
ancient name for the east coast of Sweden;=Rosladen
(Hamy, 387, 427).
XXIII. Eastern Europe
Mountains
596 Mo. ripei: Dupl. of 2.
Rivers
597 Leardo’s unnamed river entering E extremity of Baltic is
called Flum Nu on CD; Flum de Mi, CE;=Volkhof and Neva,
confused (Hamy, 390).
598 f. axiazes: Axiaces Fl. of Sarmatia Europae, Ptol. (III, 5:18 (FA9)).
599 f. turllo: Kretschmer (Port., 642) records Flumen Turle only on an anonymous fifteenth
century map in the Museum für Meereskunde, Berlin
(ibid., pp. 133-135);=Dniester (ibid., 642).
60
Edifices
(A) North of Neva
600 zimachia Inferior: ?corruption of Sarmatia, Ptol. (passim (FA9)). See also 12.
601 rosia: =Russia.
(B) Between Don, Neva, and Black Sea
602 Lordo, applying to a group of tents;=the Golden Horde of Tatars (Hallb., 318-319).
603 nogard|ia: Nogorado, CD; Nogorodo, CE;=Novgorod (Hamy, 390).
604 alana: Allania, CA;=the Alans (Hallb., 13-14).
605 albana: Albania, NW of Caspian Sea, Ptol. (V, 12 (FA18)); see Hallb., 14-15;=Shirvan
and Daghestan (Besnier, 29).
606 br . . ica(?): Branchicha, CA; Brancica, Piz.;=Briansk (Hamy, 392).
607 brachi|at: ?Dupl. of 606.
608 bthnia: =?Bothnia.
609 rossia: Dupl. of 601.
610 transil|uana: =Transylvania, misplaced.
Place Names
(A) Crimean Peninsula
611 gotia: =“A small stretch of land between the Yaila Range
and the coast, in the hands of the Genoese after the fourteenth
century” (Kret., Port., 643); see also Yule, Polo, ii, 492.
612 soldaia: =Sudak, important trading post in Genoese hands after 1365 (ibid., 644).
613 gafa: =Kafa, Feodosia (ibid.).
614 soronti(?): =?
615 uospe|ro: =Kerch (ibid.).
(B) At Eastern End of the Baltic.
616 piaha(?): =?Pinsk.
617 letefa|n paga|n: Litefanie Pagans, CA;=Lithuania (Hamy, 398-399).
(C) On Lake at Headwaters of Neva, Don, and Volga
618 perana: Perum, CA; CE=Murom (Hamy, 394).
XXIV. Far North
619 DIXERTO DEXABITADO PER FREDO (desert uninhabited because of cold): See 305.
61
LIST OF REFERENCES
63
The publications listed here are those to which frequent reference
only is made in the Notes and Appendix. The abbreviations
there employed precede each reference.
Besnier: Maurice Besnier, Lexique de géographie ancienne, Paris,
1914.
Buchon and Tastu: J. A. C. Buchon and J. Tastu, Notice d’un
atlas en langue catalane, manuscrit de l’an 1375, conservé parmi
les manuscrits de la Bibliothèque Royale sous le No 6816, fonds
ancien, in-folio maximo, in Notices et extraits de manuscrits de
la Bibliothèque du Roi et autres bibliothèques, Vol. 14, Paris,
1841, pp. 1-152.

Only complete transcription and commentary on the Catalan Atlas. See CA.

CA: Catalan Atlas (i. e. map divided into six parchment
sheets) of 1375; sometimes called Catalan Atlas of Charles
V, to whose library it belonged. Facsimile in: Choix de
documents géographiques conservés à la Bibliothèque Nationale,
Paris, 1883.

See Kret., Port., pp. 123-124; Buchon and Tastu; Cordier, CA.

CD: Map of Angellino Dulcert, 1339. See E. T. Hamy, La
mappemonde d’Angelino Dulcert, de Majorque (1339), 2nd
edition, Paris, 1903 (with photographic reproduction).

See Kret., Port., pp. 118-119.

CE: Catalan map of fifteenth century in Biblioteca Estense,
Modena. Colored reproduction accompanying Konrad
Kretschmer, Die Katalanische Weltkarte der Biblioteca Estense
zu Modena, in Zeitschr. Gesell. für Erdkunde zu
Berlin, Vol. 32, 1897, pp. 65-111, 191-218 (=Kret., CE).
Photographic reproduction in F. L. Pullé, Studi italiani di
filologia indo-iranica, Vol. 5, Atlas, Florence, 1905.
64
Con.: Libro del conosçimiento de todos los reynos y tierras ...
escrito por un franciscano español à mediados del siglo XIV.
Our references are to the pages of Sir Clements Markham’s
translation and edition (of Jiménez de la Espada’s
edition, q. v.) entitled Book of the Knowledge of all the Kingdoms....,
Hakluyt Society [Publs.], Ser. 2, Vol. 29,
London, 1912.
Cordier, CA: Henri Cordier, L’Extrême-Orient dans l’atlas
catalan de Charles V, Roi de France, in Bulletin de géographie
historique et descriptive, Vol. 10, 1895, pp. 19-64.
Cordier, Ser M. P.: Henri Cordier, Ser Marco Polo: Notes and
Addenda to Sir Henry Yule’s Edition, Containing the Results
of Recent Research and Discovery, London and New York,
1920.
FA: See Ptolemy.
Fischer: Theobold Fischer, Sammlung mittelalterlicher Welt- und
Seekarten italienischen Ursprungs und aus italienischen Bibliotheken
und Archiven herausgegeben und erläutert, Venice, 1886.

Text accompanying Raccolta.

Gerini: G. E. Gerini, Researches on Ptolemy’s Geography of
Eastern Asia (Further India and Indo-Malay Archipelago),
constituting Asiatic Society Monographs No. 1, London,
1909.
Hallb: Ivar Hallberg, L’Extrême Orient dans la littérature et la
cartographie de l’Occident des XIIIe, XIVe, et XVe siècles:
étude sur l’histoire de la géographie, Göteborg, 1906.

Alphabetical list of place names throughout Asia as a
whole (not merely the Far East) with variant forms, references
to the sources, and identifications.

Hamy: E. T. Hamy, Les origines de la cartographie de l’Europe
septentrionale, in Bulletin de géographie historique et descriptive,
Vol. 3, 1888, pp. 333-432.
65
Jiménez de la Espada: Márcos Jiménez de la Espada, editor,
Libro del conosçimiento de todos los reynos y tierras ...
escrito por un franciscano español á mediados del siglo XIV,
Madrid, 1877.

See also Con.

Kret., CE: See CE.
Kret., Port.: Konrad Kretschmer, Die italienischen Portolane
des Mittelalters, ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Kartographie
und Nautik, constituting Veröffentlichungen, Instit. für
Meereskunde und Geographisches Instit. an der Universität
Berlin, No. 13, Berlin, 1909.

This fundamental study includes a descriptive list of the
principal portolan charts and a list of the names shown on
them along the coasts of the Mediterranean and Atlantic,
with identifications with modern names.

La R.: Charles de La Roncière, La découverte de l’Afrique au
moyen âge, cartographes et explorateurs, Vols. 1 and 2, Cairo,
1925.
Lelewel: Joachim Lelewel, Géographie du moyen age, 5 vols. and
atlas, Brussels, 1852-1857.
Mauro: Fra Mauro’s map of the world, c. 1458, in Doge’s
Palace, Venice. Much reduced photographic reproduction
in Raccolta, No. 15; copy in Santarem, Atlas.

See Zurla; Kret., Port., p. 140.

Miller, Arab.: Konrad Miller, Mappae arabicae: arabische Welt- und
Länderkarten des 9.-13. Jahrhunderts, 6 vols. (of which
Vols. 3, 4, and 5 have not yet appeared), Stuttgart, 1926-1927.
Miller, Mappaemundi: Konrad Miller, Mappaemundi: die
ältesten Weltkarten, 6 vols., Stuttgart, 1895-1898.
Müller: Carl Müller, editor, Claudii Ptolemaei geographia,
Vol. 1, Parts 1 and 2, and Atlas, Paris 1883, 1901. Covers
Bks. I-V only. See Ptol.
Nordenskiöld, Periplus: A. E. Nordenskiöld, Periplus, an Essay
on the Early History of Charts and Sailing-Directions, transl.
by F. A. Bather, Stockholm, 1897.
66
Piz.: Francesco Pizigano’s map, 1367, in National Library,
Parma. Copy in [E.-F.] Jomard, Les monuments de la
géographie, ou recueil d’anciennes cartes.... Paris,
[1862].

See Kret., Port., pp. 121-122.

Polo: Marco Polo, The Book of Ser Marco Polo the Venetian
Concerning the Kingdoms and Marvels of the East, translated
and edited with notes by Sir Henry Yule, 3rd edition revised
by Henri Cordier, 2 vols., London, 1903.

Except where otherwise indicated all references are to
volumes and pages of this edition.

Ptol.: Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus), Geographia, edited by
C. F. A. Nobbe, 3 vols., Leipzig, Vol. 1, 1898; Vol. 2, 1913;
Vol. 3, n. d.

References are to book, chapter, and section of this edition.
References indicated by FA are to the plates on which
reproductions from the Rome, 1490, edition are given in
A. E. Nördenskiöld, Facsimile-Atlas to the Early History of
Cartography with Reproductions of the Most Important Maps
Printed in the XV and XVI Centuries, translated from the
Swedish Original by J. A. Ekelöf and C. R. Markham,
Stockholm, 1889.

Pullé, Vat.: See Vat.
PW: Paulys Real-encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft,
new edition begun by Georg Wissowa. 15 vols, and
4 supplements have appeared (1927), Stuttgart, 1894-.
Raccolta: Raccolta di mappamondi e carte nautiche del XIII al
XVI secolo, (H. F. and M. Münster, succeeded by) Ferd.
Ongania, Venice, (1869?), 1881. (Series of photographic
facsimiles of 17 maps, also known as Ongania Collection.
See Fischer.)
Rainaud: Armand Rainaud, Le continent austral: hypothèses et
découvertes, Paris, 1893.
67
Santarem: Le Vicomte de Santarem, Essai sur l’histoire de la
cosmographie et de la cartographie pendant le moyen-age....,
3 vols. and atlas, Paris, 1849-1852.
Spruner-Menke: K. von Spruner and Th. Menke, Hand-atlas
für die Geschichte des Mittelalters und der neueren Zeit (third
edition of Spruner’s atlas revised by Menke), Gotha, 1880.
Vat.: Map in Vatican Library, fondo Museo Borgiano, No. V.
Photographic reproduction with commentary in: F. L. Pullé,
Una carta itineraria del secolo XV [Vaticana Borgiana], constituting
Studi italiani di filologia indo-iranica, Vol. 5, La
cartografia antica dell’ India, Part 2, Appendix 4, Florence,
1905 (=Pullé, Vat.).
Vilad.: Map of Mecia de Viladestes, 1413. Colored reproduction
of African portion as frontispiece of La R., Vol. 1.

See Kret., Port., p. 126.

Vivien de St. Martin: [Louis] Vivien de St. Martin, Le nord de
l’Afrique dans l’antiquité grecque et romaine: étude historique et
géographique, Paris, 1863.
Wright, Lore: J. K. Wright, The Geographical Lore of the Time
of the Crusades: a Study in the History of Medieval Science and
Tradition in Western Europe, constituting American Geographical
Society Research Series No. 15, New York, 1925.
Yule, Cath.: Sir Henry Yule, Cathay and the Way Thither, 2nd
edit., edited by Henri Cordier, 4 vols., Hakluyt Society
[Publs.], Ser. 2, Vols. 33, 37, 38, 41, London, 1913-1916.
Yule, Polo: See Polo.
Zurla: Placido Zurla, Il mappamondo di Fra Mauro Camaldolese,
Venice, 1806.
71
THE REPRODUCTION OF THE LEARDO MAP
By A. B. Hoen
A. Hoen & Company, Baltimore, Md.
[One of the first things usually asked in regard to the reproduction
or facsimile of an old map is: “How was it made?” To
answer this question and to give some idea of the difficult technical
problems involved, Mr. Hoen, under whose direction the
Society’s reproduction of the Leardo Map was made, has been
kind enough to furnish the following note.—J. K. W.]
The Leardo Map is painted on parchment. Some of the colors
have faded, and others here and there have separated from the
skin, leaving blanks in the painting. The latter defects are especially
noticeable in the yellow zones encircling the map proper.
To avoid the injection of the personal element into the reproduction,
no attempt was made to restore the missing letters or symbols.
It is further to be noted that in cases of partial legibility
the very palest parts of the faded manuscript may have failed to
register in the reproduction, although great care was bestowed on
this part of the work.
As a first step in the reproduction of the map, color separation
negatives were made on photographic plates sensitized for all the
colors. By interposing proper light filters and by making separate
exposures for each color, negatives giving red, yellow or
green, and blue or purple values were made, together with a
fourth negative giving neutral tones—black and grays.
As the last negative comprehends almost the entire base of the
map, special attention was devoted to its conversion into a printing
plate. The process employed is known in Germany as
“Albertype” or “Lichtdruck,” in England as “collotype,” and
in America as “heliotype” or “photogelatin.” Of these names,
“collotype” seems to be the most fitting. Briefly, this process
consists of sensitizing a gelatin film with a chromic salt and
72
exposing it to light under a negative. In proportion to the
amount of light passing the negative there will be a reaction in the
chromated gelatin. In this reaction the gelatin loses its power of
absorbing water and takes on the opposite property of holding
“non-watery” substances, such as printing ink. The action of
the light is a graded one, varying from full effect under the clear
parts of the negative to nil under the very dense parts. A similar
gradation in ink-retaining powers is acquired by the exposed
gelatin film. Thus, where the light exerts full effect the gelatin
will be completely hardened and will hold the ink in its greatest
intensity (solid); the parts which receive less light or none at all
will hold the ink in attenuated quantity. The lights and shades
of the monochrome picture are thus reproduced.
In order that the film may exercise this selective power of taking
on or rejecting ink it is necessary that the unaltered parts be
kept moist. Therefore, after exposure under the negative, the
film is washed to free the gelatin of the unused chromates.
While still moist it is rolled with a roller carrying printing ink.
This roller will discharge its ink on the hardened parts of the
film in proportion to the amount of light that each part has
received through the negative. If a sheet of paper is then
pressed on the inked film it will lift the ink and the resulting impression
will be of the same character as the base color of the
Leardo Map.
It is of interest to note that as the light-affected and hardened
surface of the film accommodates itself to the unaffected underlying
gelatin (as the latter swells in washing) it breaks up into a net
of lines. This reticulation is barely perceptible in the high lights
of the picture but gradually increases in strength until the mesh
fuses into the solid color of the deepest shades.
It will now be apparent that the feasibility of printing these
colloid plates hinges on the fact that the graded ink-attracting
mesh is separated by inversely graded ink-repelling, interstitial,
unaltered, and moist gelatin.
Its mesh not being apparent to the unaided eye, the collotype
approaches the fidelity of a true photograph in the rendering
73
of details. For this reason, the collotype process has been
selected as best suited for the reproduction of the Leardo base.
The coloring of the map was done by overprinting, in lithography,
as many colors as were deemed necessary to convey a fair
idea of the original. Lithographic plates were made from the
color separation negatives mentioned above. The principles
underlying the lithographic process are, broadly, similar to those
described for gelatin printing, the essential elements in the process
being a water-absorbing ground mass (limestone) in place of the
gelatin and a water-repelling and ink-attracting surface affection
similar to that created by the action of light on the chromated
gelatin film.
Lithographic stone is an amorphous carbonate of lime of fine,
close texture. It has an affinity for water—that is, it is easily
kept damp. This affinity may be destroyed by changing the
carbonate of lime to some water-resisting salt, such as the oleate,
or by adding to the surface of the stone a film having the same
power. Both of these methods were utilized in making the color
plates of the Leardo Map.
A number of lithographic stones were properly surfaced and
this surface covered with very thin, light-sensitive, colloid films.
The color separation negatives were exposed over these sensitive
films and the resulting photographs on stone gave the red, yellow,
blue, and other values of the original as they had been analyzed
by the light filters.
No color separation process, however, can eliminate from
the areal coloring the black and grays of the base. Similarly,
the colors themselves absorb a certain amount of white light
so that the effect of the areal coloring is also felt in the monochrome
reproduction of the base map (e. g., gray lettering is
lost in heavily colored areas). For this reason, it is necessary to
correct by hand the unnatural effect produced by the overprinting
of all the color plates in the darker portions of the picture.
Lithography is best suited for the control of these difficulties, and
for this reason the color plates were made on stone.
The mechanical printing of the edition from gelatin or stone
74
embraces three essential operations: (1) moistening the plate by
damping rollers; (2) inking the plate by inking rollers; (3) pressing
of suitable paper on the inked plate. After the base is printed,
the base plate is taken from the press, another plate, carrying one
of the map colors, is placed in position, and the proper color put
on the inking rollers. The printing of the second color is then
done as was that of the base. Similar changes of the printing
plates and colored inks follow in order for each of the colors which
make up the complete map.
Eight color printings in addition to the base color were found
necessary for the proper rendering of the Leardo painting. One
of these, a light gray-buff, covers the area of the parchment and
serves to bring it out from the white paper background.
In selecting a suitable paper for this reproduction, certain
qualities had to be considered. Among these were good printing
surface, durability, and as much strength as could be had along
with the above essentials. A chart plate paper of high rag content
was made especially for the work.
75
KEY MAPS


Fig. 4—General key map. The numbers correspond to those of the
main center heads in the commentary on pp. 32-60.



Fig. 5—Detailed key map: northeastern section. The numbers in
this and in Figs. 6-9 correspond to the Arabic numbers on pp. 32-60.



Fig. 6—Detailed key map: east-central section.



Fig. 7—Detailed key map: southeastern section.



Fig. 8—Detailed key map: northwestern section.



Fig. 9—Detailed key map: west-central section.



Fig. 10—Detailed key map: southwestern section.

Transcriber’s Notes

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.
Corrected a few palpable typographical errors.
In the Detailed Contents, broke paragraphs up so that each number (label) is on a separate line.
In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Leardo Map of the World, 1452 or
1453, by John Kirtland Wright

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEARDO MAP OF WORLD, 1452 OR 1453 ***

***** This file should be named 53480-h.htm or 53480-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/4/8/53480/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.